North Inlet-Winyah Bay (NIW) NERR Water Quality Metadata 

January - December 1997

Updated: August 24, 2001



I. Data Set & Research Descriptors


1.  Principal investigator(s) & contact persons

	Dr. Dennis Allen, Manager

	Christopher Aadland, Research Specialist

	Ginger Ogburn-Matthews, Research Data Manager



	E-mail:

	dallen@belle.baruch.sc.edu	Baruch Marine Laboratory

	caadland@belle.baruch.sc.edu	University of South Carolina  

	ginger@belle.baruch.sc.edu	PO Box 1630, Georgetown, SC 29442

					Phone: (843) 546-6219	

	Baruch Institute home page:	http://inlet.geol.sc.edu.

	CDMO home page:	http://inlet.geol.sc.edu/cdmohome.html



2.  Entry verification

The .dat and .csv versions of the raw data files were uploaded to a PC from 
either YSI or Hydrolab dataloggers.  Data plots were produced and examined for 
any anomalies using PC6000 software .  Comma delimited files are opened in 
Microsoft EXCEL 5.0 and edited by removing unnecessary headers, footers and 
spaces.  Suspect data were evaluated as to being either good or bad based on 
criteria outlined in the CDMO manual ver. 3.0.  If the data are determined to be 
bad, they were deleted from the final edited .txt file and then documented in 
the metadata.  If it could not be determined whether or not suspect data is bad 
(as was often the case with turbidity) the data was left in the final edited 
.txt file and noted in the metadata as anomalous.  Missing data due to equipment 
failure or maintenance were deleted from the final edited .txt file and were 
replaced with periods (.).  Edited (.txt) and raw (.csv) files were then FTP'd 
to our Sun Sparc II server and archived.  The bi-weekly edited (.csv) files are 
merged to contain one full month of data.  All 1997 Thousand Acre and Oyster 
Landing data were verified using the CDMO 5.0 Microsoft Excel oulier macro which 
are designed to detect any outliers (values which fall outside the range that 
the instrument is designed to measure - see section II.8 of this document) and 
other erroneous data.  Outliers were determined according to the instrument 
manufacturers' manual.  After the CDMO macros were run, files with suspicious 
data were charted in Microsoft Excel 5.0 to determine whether there were any 
problems with the probes.  The dissolved oxygen (DO) and Turbidity (Turb) probes 
were the most problematic.  In instances where data values increased or 
decreased in an exponential fashion and or intermittently went outside the 
accepted range for that instrument and never returned to normal, the data was 
considered suspect, noted in the metadata, and removed from the final edited 
data file.  The date/hour and column reformat macros were then run on the data 
files before being saved in their final edited form (.txt).  The most current 
CDMO macros are available on the NERRS CDMO home page.  Chris Aadland edited and 
archived the 1997 data for Thousand Acre and Oyster Landing. 



3.  Research Objectives

The principal objective of this study is to record long-term water quality data 
for North Inlet/Winyah Bay in order to observe any physical changes or trends in 
water quality over time.    Measurements were taken every 30 minutes over two 
week collecting periods at the Oyster Landing and Thousand Acre sites. 



4.  Research methods (YSI and Hydrolab dataloggers)

YSI and/or Hydrolab dataloggers are currently mounted in a 4" diameter PVC pipe 
which is strapped to a treated 2" X 6" board; and then attached via stainless 
steel bands to a piling at both the Thousand Acre and Oyster Landing sites.  The 
PVC pipe which houses the data loggers has two large windows cut out near the 
bottom for the probes to have direct contact with the water column.  A stop bolt 
placed through the PVC pipe below the cut out windows keeps the datalogger 
exactly one foot (30 cm) above the creek bottom.  Every 30 minutes measurements 
of specific conductivity, salinity, percent saturation, dissolved oxygen, water 
temperature, pH, turbidity , and water level are recorded.  The two week 
sampling interval has been selected due to biofouling of the individual probes 
and expected battery life.  At the end of each sampling interval, the 
dataloggers are brought back to the laboratory to be downloaded, cleaned and 
recalibrated.  Before the instruments are cleaned and recalibrated a post 
calibration reading is taken from each instrument in fresh standard to see if 
any of the instruments exhibit drift.  The Ph probe was calibrated using a two 
point method and either 4,7 or 7,10 standards.  The turbidity probe calibration 
also used a two point method using 0 &100 NTU standards.  Specific Conductivity 
was calibrated using a one point method and a 10micromhos standard.  These 
procedures were carried out according to the methods described in the YSI 
Operators Manual (see sections 3 and 7).  After approximately 24 hours of down 
time for cleaning and overnight relaxing of the DO membrane, the YSI and/or 
Hydrolab dataloggers were redeployed.  YSI dataloggers are normally used, 
although on occasion due to repairs etc., a backup Hydrolab datalogger was 
substituted for a YSI unit.  All downtime due to maintenance and repair is 
recorded on a log sheet and then transferred to the metadata.





5.  Site location and character

The North Inlet-Winyah Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve is located on the 
Southeastern Atlantic coast of the United States in two tidal estuaries, North 
Inlet and Winyah Bay, near Georgetown, South Carolina.  The North Inlet estuary, 
located approximately 10 km east of Georgetown, is a bar-built Class C type 
estuary (Pritchard, 1955)1.  The North Inlet estuary is composed of numerous 
winding tidal creeks, and is considered a pristine tidal estuary due to minimal 
anthropogenic impacts.  The watershed drains a 24.8 km2 area of mostly pine 
forest and a moderately developed residential watershed to the north.  The 
Winyah Bay estuary, classified as a Class B type estuary by Pritchard (1955)1, 
which originates in the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina, is one of the 
largest river-estuary ecosystems on the Eastern Seaboard.  It is located 14.4 km 
south of North Inlet.  Winyah Bay drains the sub-basins of 6 major rivers which 
are heavily impacted by agriculture, mining, and industry.  The rivers drain 
approximately 46,736 km2 of uplands and marshes.  Descriptions of the two 
sampling stations are as follows:



1) Thousand Acre (TA) - (lat. 33:18:22; long. 79:15:4) The Thousand Acre 
monitoring site is located in Thousand Acre marsh tidal creek approximately 30 
meters northeast of the west bridge of Thousand Acre marsh.  The creek empties 
into the northeastern  side of the mid portion of Winyah Bay and directly drains 
pine forested upland and wetlands. Salinity ranges from 0 to 15 ppt. and tidal 
flux is approximately 1m.  The bottom is most composed of fine sediments and 
detritus.  Georgetown, 5 km upstream from the Thousand Acre site and on the 
southern side of Winyah Bay, is the home port for a number of heavy industries 
including a steel plant, paper mill, chemical plant, and a coal fired power 
plant.  A public sewage treatment plant which discharges into the bay is also 
located in Georgetown.



2) Oyster Landing (OL) - (lat  33:21:03; long.  79:11:24). The Oyster Landing 
monitoring site is considered a fairly pristine and undisturbed area located at 
the end of the Oyster Landing pier which is also where the  NI/Winyah Bay NERR 
weather station site is located.  The pier stretches into the upper reaches of 
Crabhaul Creek in the mid western portion of North Inlet.  Crabhaul Creek 
directly drains pine forested uplands and wetlands.  Salinity can range from 0-
32 ppt. and average tidal flux is approximately 1.4m.  The bottom mostly is 
comprised of oyster shell hash with some fine sediment and detritus.



6.  Data collection period

Thousand Acre and Oyster Landing data collection both began January 1, 1995.  
All sampling is ongoing.

A Hydrolab DataSonde  was used to collect data at Thousand Acre during the 
following date and times:

06/26/97 15:30-07/02/97 11:00

07/04/97 7:00- 7/16/97 13:00



7.  Associated researchers and projects

A water chemistry program is associated with the NIW core monitoring program. 
Variables sampled include: chlorophyll, dissolved organic carbon, nitrate-
nitrite, orthophosphate, and ammonia.  (See documentation on the NIW WWW home 
page for further details).  Thousand Acre is our permanent monitoring station 
for the NERR monitoring program.  This station is also included in our NIW core 
monitoring program.



II.  Physical Structure Descriptors



8.  Variable sequence, range of measurements (units), resolution, and accuracy 



YSI 6000 datalogger

Variable Name	Format	Range of Measurements (Units)	Resolution	Accuracy 

DATE	(MMDDYY)	1-12, 1-31, 00-99 (Month, Day, Year)	(1 month, 1 day, 1 
yr)	NA 

HOUR	(HHMMSS)	0-24, 0-60, 0-60 (Hr, Min, Sec)	(1 hr, 1 min, 1 sec)	NA 

WTEMP			-5 to 45 (C)	0.01C	±0.15C 

SPCOND		0-100 (mS/cm)	0.01mS/cm	±(0.5% of reading+0.001mS/cm)

SALINITY	0-70 parts per thousand (ppt)	0.01 ppt	±1.0% of reading or 
0.1ppt, (or whichever is greater)

DO Sat	0-200 (% Saturation)	0.1% @air saturation	±2.0 % @air sat 

DO Sat	200-500 (% Saturation)	0.1% @air saturation	±6% @air sat

DO mg	0-20 (mg/l)	0.01mg/l	±0.2mg/l

DO mg	20-50 (mg/l)	0.01mg/l	±0.6mg/l

Depth (shallow)	0-9.1(m)	 0.001m	±0.018m

pH	2-14 units	0.01units	±0.2units

TURB	0-1000 NTU	0.1 NTU	±5% reading or 2.0 NTU (whichever is greater)



Hydrolab DataSonde 3

Variable Name	Range of Measurement (Units)	Resolution	Accuracy

Date	1-12, 1-31, 00-99 (Month, Day, Yr)	1 month, 1 day, 1 year	NA

Time	0-24, 0-60, 0-60 (Hr, Min, Sec)	1 hr, 1 min, 1 sec	NA

Temp	-5 to 50(c)	0.01(c)	±0.15(c)

Sp. Cond	0-100(mS/cm)	0.01(mS/cm)	±0.5%

Sal	0-70 Parts per thousand (ppt)	0.1ppt	±0.2ppt

DO	0-200(%air sat)	0.1%@ air saturation	± 2% @air saturation

DO	0-20(mg/l)	0.01mg/l	±0.2mg/l

Level	0-10(m)	0.01m	±0.09m

pH	2-14 units	0.01units	±0.2units



Data columns are separated by tabs.



9.  Coded variable indicator and variable code definitions

Site definitions: OL = Oyster Landing; TA = Thousand Acre



10.  Data anomalies (suspect data)

Any questionable outlying data points between January 1, 1997 and December 31, 
1997, not addressed below, have been checked and correspond to probable rainfall 
or other weather related events.



OYSTER LANDING(OL)



Jan-97	

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

01/30/97	19:00:00	Turb. 	>1000

01/30/97	20:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

01/30/97	22:00:00	Turb. 	>1000

01/30/97	23:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

01/31/97	00:00:00- 01:30	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

01/31/97	05:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

01/31/97	17:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.





Feb-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

02/01/97	00:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

02/02/97	09:30:00- 10:00:00	Turb. 	>1000

02/03/97	18:30:00	Turb. 	>1000

02/06/97	08:30:00	Turb. 	>1000

02/06/97	09:00:00-10:30:00	Turb.	neg. Turb.

02/21/97	09:00:00	02/21/97	10:30:00	all	weak battery

02/22/97	08:30:00	02/25/97	15:00:00	all	weak battery





Mar-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

03/07/97	20:30:00- 21:00:00	%DO	unusually high

03/08/97	08:00:00- 10:30:00	%DO	unusually high	

03/08/97	15:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/08/97	23:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/09/97	02:30:00	Turb. 	>1000

03/09/97	10:30:00- 11:00:00	Turb. 	>1000

03/09/97	12:30:00	Turb. 	>1000

03/09/97	13:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/09/97	15:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/09/97	16:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/09/97	17:00:00	Turb.	>1000

03/09/97	17:30:00- 18:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/09/97	21:30:00- 22:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/10/97	08:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/10/97	10:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/10/97	11:30:00- 12:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/13/97	16:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.




April-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

04/25/97	22:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.





May-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

05/01/97	09:00:00- 09:30:00	%DO	unusually high readings





June-97(OL)

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

06/04/97	10:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

06/11/97	11:30:00	%DO	unusually high readings

6/13/97	07:30	DO%, DOmg/l	Neg. DO readings

6/14/97	07:30	DO%, DOmg/l	Neg. DO readings

06/17/97	11:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

06/30/97	23:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.





Jul-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

07/11/97	12:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

07/13/97	07:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

07/13/97	23:30:00	Turb. 	>1000

07/22/97	15:30:00	Turb.	neg. Turb.

07/27/97	09:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

07/27/97	10:00:00	Turb.	>1000

07/28/97	01:00:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

07/29/97	06:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

07/30/97	05:30:00	Turb.	>1000

7/31/97	11:00	through 7/31/97	23:45	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings deleted



Aug-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

8/01/97	00:00	through 8/13/97	10:00	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings deleted

08/02/97	12:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

08/04/97	04:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.

08/05/97	16:30	08/13/97	09:30	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings

08/21/97	09:30	08/31/97	23:30	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings





Sep-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

9/01/97	00:00	9/02/97	9:00	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO reading

9/16/97	10:30	9/29/97	07:00	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO reading

09/16/97	10:30  14:30	Very low spcond/salinity and depth readings; 
Specific conductivity port may have come out of the water.



Oct-97 (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

10/01/97	00:00:00	10/15/97	14:00:00	DO%,DOmg	erratic readings

10/14/97	10:30:00	10/15/97	14:00:00	pH		unusually low 
readings



Nov-97 (OL)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

11/26/97	10:00:00	12/12/97	10:00:00	Depth	unit was not in mounting 
pipe.  See other remarks section for details.




THOUSAND ACRE (TA)





Feb-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

02/21/97	18:00:00	Turb. 	>1000

02/25/97	22:30:00	Turb. 	neg. Turb.





Mar-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

03/07/97	07:00:00		Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/08/97	19:00:00		Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/09/97	06:00:00		Turb. 	neg. Turb.

03/09/97	17:00:00		Turb. 	neg. Turb.





May-97

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

5/9/97	12:30	5/22/97	07:30	%DO,mg/l	bad DO probe; all data deleted


Jul-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

07/17/97	15:00:00	DO%, DOmg	out of range





Oct-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

10/12/97	07:00:00		Turb. 	neg. Turb.





Dec-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	Variable	Reason

12/03/97	 20:30:00 Turb. 	neg. Turb.

12/11/97	 05:00:00 Turb. 	neg. Turb.

12/11/97	 08:30:00 Turb. 	neg. Turb.

12/18/97	 22:30:00 Turb. 	>1000

12/19/97 15:00:00 Turb.	>1000

12/20/97 15:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/20/97 16:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/24/97 06:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/24/97 07:30:00-8:00:00 Turb	>1000

12/24/97 09:00:00-11:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/24/97 12:30:00-13:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/24/97 14:30:00-16:00:00 Turb	>1000

12/24/97 17:00:00 Turb	>1000

12/24/97 19:00:00 Turb	>1000

12/25/97 08:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/27/97 20:00:00 Turb	>1000

12/28/97 01:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/29/97 17:30:00 Turb	>1000

12/31/97 23:00:00-23:30:00 Turb	>1000




12. Missing Data 



Every two weeks at TA and OL, there is a period of approximately 24 hours of 
missing data due to maintenance and calibration.




OYSTER LANDING (OL)





Jan-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

1/1/97	00:00	1/8/97	13:30	all	maintenance

1/21/97	12:30	1/24/97	12:30	all	maintenance 





Feb-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

2/6/97	11:00	2/7/97	11:00	all	maintenance

2/21/97	09:00	2/21/97	10:30	all	weak battery

2/22/97	08:30	2/25/97	15:00	all	weak bettery 





Mar-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

3/10/97	13:00	3/13/97	15:30	all	maintenance 

3/26/97	15:30	3/27/97	13:00	all	maintenance 





Apr-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

4/10/97	08:00	4/11/97	13:30:00	all	maintenance

4/24/97	08:00	4/25/97	12:00	all	maintenance 





May-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

5/8/97	08:30	5/9/97	11:30	all	maintenance 

5/22/97	08:00	5/23/97	12:30	all	maintenance





Jun-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

6/5/97	08:00	6/6/97	13:00	all	maintenance 

6/13/97	07:30	DO%, DOmg/l	Neg. DO readings

6/14/97	07:30	DO%, DOmg/l	Neg. DO readings

6/19/97	08:00	6/20/97	13:00	all	maintenance




Jul-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

7/2/97	11:30	7/7/97	11:00	all	maintenance 

7/16/97	12:30	7/17/97	09:30	all	maintenance 

7/30/97	12:30	7/31/97	10:30	all	maintenance

7/31/97	11:00	7/31/97	23:45	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings deleted



Aug-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

8/1/97	00:00	8/13/97	10:00	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings deleted

8/13/97	10:00	8/21/97	09:00	all	maintenance

8/21/97	09:30	8/31/97	23:30	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings



Sep-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

9/1/97	00:00	9/2/97	9:00	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings 

9/2/97	09:30	9/3/97	9:30	all	maintenance 

9/15/97	08:30	9/16/97	10:00	all	maintenance 

9/16/97	10:30	9/29/97	07:00	DO%, DOmg/l	Erratic DO readings 

9/29/97	07:30	9/30/97	09:30	all	maintenance




Oct-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

10/01/97	00:00:	10/15/97	14:00	DO%, DOmg erratic readings

10/15/97	14:30	10/16/97	14:30	all	maintenance 

10/29/97	09:30	10/30/97	11:00	all	maintenance





Nov-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

11/8/97	09:00	11/08/97	11:30	all	maintenance

11/8/97	20:00	11/13/97	11:30	all	maintenance

11/24/9712:30	11/26/97 10:30	all	maintenance 





Dec-97

Oyster Landing (OL)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

12/12/97	10:30	12/16/97	14:00	all	maintenance

12/16/97	16:00	12/17/97	10:30	all	Not deployed due to possible vandalism




THOUSAND ACRE (TA)

d

Jan-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time 	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

1/1/97	00:00	1/8/97	14:00	all	maintenance 

1/22/97	16:00	1/31/97	23:30	all	maintenance 





Feb-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

2/1/97	00:00	2/7/97	11:30	all	maintenance

2/22/97	08:30	2/25/97	15:30	all	maintenance





Mar-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

3/10/97	12:00	3/13/97	16:00	all	maintenance 

3/26/97	10:30	3/27/97	11:00	all	maintenance 





Apr-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

4/10/97	8:30	4/11/97	13:30	all	maintenance 

4/24/97	8:30	4/30/97	23:30	all	maintenance 





May-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

5/1/97	00:00	5/1/97	13:30	all	maintenance 

5/8/97	09:00	5/9/97	12:00	all	maintenance 

5/9/97	12:30	5/22/97	07:30	%DO,mg/l	bad DO probe; all data deleted

5/22/97	08:00	5/23/97	13:00	all	maintenance





Jun-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

6/5/97	9:00	6/6/97	12:00	all	maintenance 

6/19/97	8:30	6/30/97	23:30	all	maintenance 





Jul-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

7/1/97	00:00	7/4/97	06:30	all	maintenance

7/4/97	07:00	7/16/97	13:00	Turb., Ph	hydrolab, no probes istalled

7/16/97	13:30	7/17/97	9:30	all	maintenance

7/17/97	10:00	7/30/97	13:00	Turb., Ph	hydrolab, no probes installed

7/17/97	15:00	DO%, DOmg	out of range

7/30/97	13:30	7/31/97	9:30	maintenance





Aug-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

8/13/97	9:00	8/19/97	9:00	all	maintenance 





Sep-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

9/2/97	9:00	9/3/97	10:00	all	maintenance

9/15/97	8:00	9/16/97	10:30	all	maintenance 

9/29/97	8:00	9/30/97	10:30	all	maintenance 





Oct-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

10/15/97	14:00	10/16/97	14:30	all	maintenance

10/29/97	09:30	10/30/97	11:30	all	maintenance





Nov-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date	Time	Variable	Reason

11/12/97	09:30	11/13/97	12:30:00	all	maintenance

11/24/97	12:00	11/26/97	11:00:00	all	maintenance





Dec-97

Thousand Acre (TA)

Date	Time	---Date 	Time	Variable	Reason

12/12/97	10:30	12/16/97	13:30	all	maintenance



Other Remarks:

	Sometime during the period from 11/26/97-12/12/97 at our OL site, vandals 
removed the YSI from its PVC mounting and threw the unit underneath the pier.  
Since the instrument was still located in close proximity to the mounting pipe 
we chose to keep the data.

	At OL from 8/21/97 9:30:00-9/27/97 9:30:00 the time was off by 35 seconds.

	At OL from 12/16/97 16:00:00-12/17/97 10:30:00 unit was not put out due to 
vandalism.



Deployment and Retrieval Log



Oyster Landing



Retrieval Date/Time	Deployment Date/Time


1/2/97	9:00:00		1/8/97	13:30:00

1/21/97	12:30:00	1/24/97	12:30:00

2/6/97	11:00:00	2/7/97	11:00:00

2/22/97	9:00:00		2/25/97	15:00:00

3/10/97	13:00:00	3/13/97	15:30:00

3/26/97	15:30:00	3/27/97	13:00:00

4/10/97	8:00:00		4/11/97	13:30:00

4/24/97	8:00:00		4/25/97	12:00:00

5/8/97	8:30:00		5/9/97	11:30:00

5/22/97	8:30:00		5/23/97	12:30:00

6/5/97	8:00:00		6/6/97	13:00:00

6/19/97	8:00:00		6/20/97	13:00:00

7/2/97	11:30:00	7/7/97	11:00:00

7/16/97	12:30:00	7/17/97	9:30:00

7/30/97	12:30:00	7/31/97	10:30:00

8/13/97	10:00:00	8/21/97	9:00:00

9/2/97	9:30:00		9/3/97	9:30:00

9/15/97	8:30:00		9/16/97	10:00:00

9/29/97	7:30:00		9/30/97	9:30:00

10/15/97	14:30:00	10/16/97	14:30:00

10/29/97	9:30:00		10/30/97	11:00:00

11/8/97		20:00:00	11/13/97	11:30:00

11/24/97	12:30:00	11/26/97	10:30:00

12/12/97	10:30:00	12/17/97	10:30:00



Thousand Acres



Retrieval Date/Time	Deployment Date/Time



1/22/97	16:00:00	2/7/97	11:30:00

2/22/97	8:30:00		2/25/97	16:00:00

3/10/97	12:00:00	3/13/97	16:00:00

3/26/97	10:30:00	3/27/97	11:00:00

4/10/97	8:30:00		4/11/97	13:30:00

4/24/97	8:30:00		5/1/97	13:30:00

5/8/97	9:00:00		5/9/97	12:00:00

5/22/97	8:00:00		5/23/97	13:00:00

6/5/97	9:00:00		6/6/97	12:00:00

6/19/97	8:30:00		7/4/97	6:30:00

7/16/97	13:30:00	7/31/97	9:30:00

8/13/97	9:00:00		8/19/97	9:00:00

9/2/97	9:00:00		9/3/97	10:00:00

9/15/97	8:00:00		9/16/97	10:30:00

9/29/97	8:00:00		9/30/97	10:30:00

10/15/97	14:00:00	10/16/97	14:30:00

10/29/97	9:30:00		10/30/97	11:30:00

11/12/97	9:30:00		11/13/97	12:30:00

11/24/97	12:00:00	11/26/97	11:00:00

12/12/97	10:30:00	12/16/97	13:30:00




