WELLS (WEL) National Estuarine Research Reserve Water Quality Metadata Report 
January-December 2000 
Latest Update: October 12, 2001

I.  Data Set & Research Descriptors

1.  Principal investigator(s) & contact persons:

Dr. Michele Dionne, Research Coordinator	
E-mail: dionne@wellsnerrcec.lib.me.us						
Phone: ext. 136	
	
Scott Orringer, Research Associate							
E-mail: sorringer@wellsnerrcec.lib.me.us						
Phone: ext. 112	
		
	Wells NERR
	342 Laudholm Farm Road
	Wells, ME 04090
	Phone: (207)646-1555
	FAX: (207)646-2930					

2.  Entry verification:

The data are directly downloaded in the YSI-PC6000 format (as a .dat file) and 
the Comma Delimited format (as a .csv file) from the dataloggers to an IBM lap-
top.  The data are reviewed using the PC6000 software (Eco-Watch).  Graphs and 
basic statistics are then generated with the Eco-Watch program and the 
information is printed out for each data file.  These graphs are used to 
determine any obvious data outliers and sonde and/or probe malfunction.  All 
downloaded data files from the dataloggers (both raw unedited .dat and .csv 
files) are then transferred via disk to a Power Mac G3, where all files are 
reviewed and  formatted for CDMO and stored.  Here the raw unedited .csv data 
files are imported into Microsoft Excel 98.  After a complete month of data has 
been recorded, each file is ready to review which requires several steps.  The 
NERR CDMO QA/QC Excel macros are used for all data.  A data file is created 
(from the merged raw unedited .csv data files) in Excel format with a full month 
of data.  The first step is to make sure that the parameter columns are in the 
correct order, specified by the NERR CDMO.  If any parameters are not collected 
due to probe failure or other causes, the cells with this missing data are 
filled in with periods (.) and documented and explained in the appropriate 
section of the metadata.  Secondly, missing dates and times are inserted in the 
data file where data were not collected due to maintenance, sonde failure, etc., 
and the cells with this missing data are filled in with periods (.) and 
documented and explained in the appropriate section of the metadata.  The first 
NERR CDMO QA/QC Excel macro is then run to determine if there are any missing 
dates and times; and if so these missing dates and times are inserted.  Next, 
the second NERR CDMO QA/QC Excel macro is used to find and filter all data 
readings outside the sonde specification measuring range for each parameter.  
Here the outlier data generated by the second macro are examined and determined 
as either explained or unexplained anomalies, as specified 
by NERR CDMO Operations Manual (Version 3.0).  All anomalous data (explained and 
unexplained) are documented and explained in the appropriate sections of the 
metadata.  The explained anomalous data are then removed from the data file and 
replaced by periods.  The unexplained anomalous data are investigated for 
validity based on weather data, field observations, instrument diagnostics, and 
Eco-Watch printouts.  If these data are rejected from the file then these are 
removed and replaced by periods.  Lastly, the third and final NERR CDMO QA/QC 
Excel macro is used to reformat all the columns in the data file to the correct 
number of significant digits.  After this last step, once the file has been 
completely formatted and edited as specified by NERR CDMO, the file is saved as 
a Tab delimited (.txt) text file and sent by FTP to the CDMO.  The metadata form 
is also submitted with the data file to the CDMO, sent also as a text file (text 
only with line breaks).  Scott Orringer is responsible for this task of entry 
verification with the analyses of suspect and anomalous data.  Michele Dionne 
supervises, proofs and answers questions with the evaluation of suspect and 
anomalous data.

The use of the newest (Version 2.0) National Estuarine Research Reserve (NERR) 
System-Wide Monitoring Program (SWMP) YSI 6-Series Multi-Parameter Water Quality 
Monitor Standard Operating Procedures began in July 1999 when they became 
available.



3.  Research objectives:

	The Webhannet River estuary is located in proximity to heavily used 
beaches in Wells, Maine.  It has a shoreline that is highly developed with 
residential and commercial structures.  The estuary receives water from a 14 sq. 
mi. watershed that is well forested.  We are measuring variations in hydrologic 
variables in the Webhannet River estuary at the Head of Tide and at the Inlet.  
Data from Head of Tide will integrate surface and ground water inputs (from both 
point and non-point sources) from the freshwater watershed into the estuary.  
Data from the Inlet will integrate surface and ground water inputs from the 
freshwater watershed and the estuarine watershed.  Differences in data between 
the Head of Tide and the Inlet will indicate inputs from the estuarine portion 
of the watershed (on the ebb tide), and inputs from the Gulf of Maine on the 
flood tide.  The instruments will track runoff events via salinity, and will 
measure pollutant-carrying sediment particles via turbidity.  Our working 
hypothesis is that the freshwater watershed is the primary source of sediment 
and therefore potential NPS pollutants in the estuary.  These two variables will 
indicate the potential for non-point source pollutants to enter the estuary, and 
whether they are of upland, estuarine or Gulf of Maine origin.  Other variables 
measured by the data loggers (DO, temperature, pH, specific conductivity, and 
water level) will provide important baseline data to track changes in the 
estuary's physico-chemical parameters over the long term.  These variables can 
be affected by changes in human water use, and by natural or human induced 
changes in Inlet and river channel morphology, climate, and organic loadings.  
The Inlet site is heavily impacted at the Wells Harbor dock and is our long-term 
monitoring site.  The Head of Tide site is relatively unimpacted, located just 
east of the Route One bridge, and is our roving site.


4.  Research Methods:

	The Wells NERR YSI monitoring program began in April 1995 at one site 
(Head of Tide site-HT) and May 1995 at a second site (Inlet site-IN) in the 
Webhannet River estuary.  The two data loggers are installed with bottom 
moorings, as described below.  Both data loggers have 1/4 inch black vector mesh 
placed on the outside (using rubber bands) of the sonde guard to prevent fouling 
and unwanted animals.  All deployment structures (PVC tubes) described below are 
labeled with the Wells NERR information.

*IMPORTANT CHANGES TO NOTE AT THE INLET SITE (IN); where our telemetry unit is 
stationed: A new vented level YSI 6600 with its new vented level cable was 
deployed to collect its first data on 5/4/99 at 12:00.  The YSI telemetry unit 
began collecting its first data on 3/16/98 at 10:30:00.  

ALSO-at the Inlet site (IN): No data collected from 4/6 12:30 through 4/13 17:30 
due to a telemetry unit crash; caused by a major leak through the vented-level 
cable causing data sonde corrosion at the cable/sonde interface.  From 4/13 
18:00 through 5/30 9:30 a non-vented level YSI 6000 was used in its place, as 
both the vented-level cable and YSI 6600 were sent back to YSI for repairs.

The Inlet site (IN) deployment methods are different than the other site (HT), 
due to the installation of a YSI telemetry unit.  A 23 foot, 4-inch diameter 
high-grade PVC tube was installed against a dock piling.  Four steel flat bars 
with bolts were used to attach this 23-foot PVC tube against the dock piling.  
A 3 by 1.5 inch PVC transducer was glued on the inside bottom of the PVC tube to 
allow the sonde to sit exactly 1.0 meter (3.28 ft) off the bottom.  Several 
vertical holes, representative of the sonde guard, were cut out the 
circumference near the bottom of the PVC pipe to allow water flow to the probes.  
An L-shaped steel bar with two end-holes is placed through two created slits 
about a half of foot from the top of the PVC tube.  A stainless steel wire 
(1/16) is attached to the sonde bail using two stainless steel clips; and to one 
end of the L-shaped steel bar for sonde deployment and retrieval.  A marine lock 
is attached through the other end of the L-shaped steel bar to hold the bar, 
wire, and sonde in place and for security.  A PVC threaded cap screws in to the 
threaded top of the PVC tube, also for security.  A hole was created in the PVC 
cap to allow the sonde to hook up with the telemetry unit using the 50 foot 
cable.  The collection of data parameters at the Inlet (IN) site are slightly 
different then at the roving (HT) site, due to the telemetry unit installation.  
Two to four week variable sampling periods were chosen due to limitations 
created by the life of the dissolved oxygen membrane and probe fouling.  
Battery power is not needed anymore within the sonde itself (although, battery 
power is needed during calibrations and downloading) at the time of deployment 
at this site because of the telemetry unit's solar batter power.  Measurements 
of temperature, specific conductivity, salinity, percent saturation, dissolved 
oxygen, depth, pH, and turbidity are recorded at 30 minute intervals throughout 
the deployment period.  Time, date, and battery voltage are no longer programmed 
to be recorded by the sonde, since these parameters are already programmed with 
the Eco-Watch Program (see YSI¹s Eco-Watch Users Guide).

	The other site, Head of Tide (HT), is deployed similarly, except for sonde 
height off the bottom (see below).  This site uses a 5 foot, 4 inch diameter 
high grade PVC tube.  The PVC tube is attached to a 12 foot, heavy steel sign 
post using a stainless steel bolt at the bottom of the tube, a stainless steel 
cable wrap at the top, and several thick electrical cable ties in between.  The 
steel sign post was pounded in about 7 feet into the river bottom, such that the 
bottom of the PVC tube was flat on the river bottom.  The PVC tube has one 3 by 
1.5 inch PVC transducer glued on the inside bottom of the PVC tube to allow the 
sonde to sit exactly at a certain height off the bottom (see below).  Several 
vertical holes, representative of the sonde guard, were cut out the 
circumference near the bottom of the PVC pipe to allow water flow to the probes.  
An L-shaped steel bar with two end-holes is placed through two created slits 
about a half of foot from the top of the PVC tube.  A stainless steel wire 
(1/16) is attached to the sonde bail using two stainless steel clips; and to one 
end of the L-shaped steel bar for sonde deployment and retrieval.  A marine lock 
is attached through the other end of the L-shaped steel bar to hold the bar, 
wire, and sonde in place and for security.  A flotation buoy is tied to the PVC 
tubes incase the deployment structure ever gets dislodged.  The deployment depth 
for the Head of Tide site (HT) is such that the probe-end of the data logger is 
secured 0.30 meters (1.0 ft) off the bottom.	

	Two to four week variable sampling periods were chosen for the data sonde 
due to limitations created by the life of the dissolved oxygen membrane, probe 
fouling, and limited battery power.  Measurements of temperature, specific 
conductivity, salinity, percent saturation, dissolved oxygen, depth, pH, and 
turbidity are recorded at 30 minute intervals throughout the deployment period.
	After the deployment period, the data logger is brought back into the 
Wells Reserve Laboratory for downloading, cleaning, and calibration.  These 
procedures are carried out to the methods described in the YSI Operating Manual.  
Calibration standards are needed and used for only specific conductivity (10 
mS/cm), pH (buffer solutions of pH 4, 7, and 10), and turbidity (100 NTU).  
Conductivity and pH standards are purchased from Fisher Scientific.  Turbidity 
standards are purchased from Advanced Polymer Systems, Inc. (Redwood City, CA).  
The dissolved oxygen membranes are replaced and sit 6-24 hours before each 
deployment.  After approximately 6-24 hours of down time for cleaning, 
maintenance and recalibration, the YSI Data logger is redeployed for another 
sampling period.  Also, with our extra data sonde, we have been reducing the 
amount of time of missing data from calibrations and maintenance for this site.

Note:  The Wells NERR two Drakes Island sites (see 1996-1997 metatdata) are 
currently being monitored (since 1996), but we are using the data for another 
project (CICEET-Wells Harbor dredge; see Section 7-Associated Researchers and 
Projects); and are not collecting the dissolved oxygen, percent saturation, and 
pH parameters.

The use of the newest (Version 2.0) National Estuarine Research Reserve (NERR) 
System-Wide Monitoring Program (SWMP) YSI 6-Series Multi-Parameter Water Quality 
Monitor Standard Operating Procedures began in July 1999 when they became 
available.
	

5.  Site location and character    

	The Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve is located in York County, 
within the town of Wells, on the coast of southern Maine and faces the Atlantic 
Ocean.  The Wells NERR is approximately 31 km (20 miles) south of Portland, 
Maine and 110 km (70 miles) north of Boston, Massachusetts.  The Reserve 
encompasses 1,690 acres along the Gulf of Maine coastline of tidally-flushed 
wetlands, riparian and transitional upland fields and forests within the Little 
River Estuary and the larger Webhannet River Estuary.  Both estuaries arise in 
the sandy glacial outwash plain about eight miles inland.  Both rivers empty 
into Wells Bay, a sandy basin stretching for approximately ten miles along the 
Atlantic coast.  Bordering each river's Inlet are double spit barrier beaches 
attached to the mainland.  The backbarrier system is approximately 5 sq. km and 
is composed of large intertidal marshes (predominantly S. patens and S. 
alterniflora), intertidal sand and mud flats, and tidal channels.  The watershed 
for the Webhannet River estuary covers an area of 35 sq. km and has a total of 6 
streams, brooks or creeks which enter the estuary.  These tributaries flow 
across sand and gravel deposits near the headwaters and the impermeable 
sandy muds of the Presumpscot Formation in the lower reaches.  The Webhannet 
River is connected to the ocean via Wells Inlet, which has a spring tidal prism 
of 28,200,000 cubic m (Ward 1993). 
The force and volume of tidal action affect the salinity level of both rivers.  
In the Wells region, the annual mean wave height is almost 20 inches.  The 
estuarine system is dominated by semi-diurnal tides having a range of 8.5 to 9.8 
feet.  The volume of freshwater influx into both estuaries is moderate to low 
(on the order of 0.5 cubic meters/second), especially in the summer, because of 
the rivers relatively small drainage areas and the presence of deep glacial 
deposits.  The relatively low flows from these two rivers taken in with the 20 
inch per year average runoff of the area surrounding the estuaries combine to 
form a fresh water flow, which is dwarfed by tidal flushing.  Twelve-foot tides 
dwarf the freshwater flow into the Webhannet estuary, which has a drainage area 
of 14.1 square miles.  The Webhannet estuary, fed by both Blacksmith and Depot 
Brooks, is adjacent to the harbor and greatly developed land.  It offers a 
valuable opportunity for comparison with the relatively pristine Little River 
estuary.  The land use of the Webhannet estuary include a total of 15% for 
wetland, fresh water, and tidal marsh; a total of 63.7 % for woodland; and a 
total of 18.6% for developed land (compared to a total of 5.7% development in 
the Little River estuary) (WNERR RMA 1996; Holden 1997).
	There are two sampling sites in the Webhannet River estuary.  These are 
located at the Head of Tide and at the Inlet.  The tidal range at each of these 
sites is 2.6-2.9 meters.   
	The Head of Tide site is located 4 miles south of the Wells Reserve, just 
downstream of the Webhannet Falls (freshwater) and 10 feet east of Route One (43 
deg 17' 54.25227" N Latitude, 70 deg 35' 13.82728" W Longitude).  Route One is 
used heavily with traffic all year, especially during the summer tourist months.  
This site has soft mud, sand, and a rocky substrate, and the low and high tide 
depth is relatively shallow.  The salinity range here is 0-31 ppt, with a mean 
of 3.6 ppt.  These head waters of the Webhannet are relatively undeveloped.  
This site is located just 10 feet east of the Route One bridge, and is our 
roving site.
	The Inlet site is located 1.5 miles south of the Wells Reserve, at the 
Wells Harbor pier (43 deg 19' 12.44804" N Latitude, 70 deg 33' 13.82728" W 
Longitude).  The mouth of the Webhannet estuary forms an extensive wetland/salt 
marsh area, which is surrounded by development.  Wells Harbor, which was most 
recently dredged in 1971, has moorings for approximately 200 commercial fishing 
and recreational boats.  The mouth of the river flows between two jetties to the 
Atlantic Ocean.  This channel was dredged in 1974.  This site has a 
predominately sand substrate and is characterized by strong current during 
incoming and outgoing tides.  The salinity range here is 7-35 ppt, with a mean 
of 31 ppt.  The Inlet site is heavily impacted at the Wells Harbor dock and is 
our long-term monitoring site.

6.  Data collection period:

	The Webhannet River Head of Tide (HT) site data collection was re-deployed 
(after being pulled in December 1995, December 1996, December 1997, December 
1998, and December 1999) on April 14, 17:00 and pulled after December 9, 3:00 
for the winter months to prevent ice damage.  This site gets a large amount of 
ice coverage from December through late March.
	The Webhannet River Inlet (IN) site data collection began May 29, 1995, 
13:00.  The IN datalogger is ongoing throughout the year and is considered our 
long-term monitoring site, as this site remains relatively ice-free.
	
7.  Associated researchers and projects

WELLS NATIONAL ESTUARINE RESEARCH RESERVE RESEARCH AT THE RESERVE 1999-2000:

The Research Program at the Wells NERR conducts and supports research, 
monitoring, workshops, and research/resource management planning of relevance at 
local, regional and national levels.  The overall aim of our work is to produce 
science-based information needed to sustain or restore Gulf of Maine coastal 
habitats and resources, especially those found in salt marsh estuaries and 
watersheds.  During 1999-2000 twenty-three different studies (involving 79 
scientists, students, and staff from the Reserve, 26 academic institutions and 
19 resource management groups) focused on several related themes: 1) the quality 
of water resources in salt marsh estuaries and watersheds 2) land conservation 
strategies to protect coastal watersheds factors controlling salt marsh 
accretion, erosion and plant community vigor 3) the value of salt marsh as 
habitat for fish, shellfish and birds, and 4) restoration of salt marsh habitat 
degraded through human actions.

Estuarine Water Resource Quality

Water quality is monitored continuously at several stations with automated 
instruments as part of a NERRS systemwide monitoring program, as well as 
bimonthly at 15-20 stations through our WET volunteer monitoring program.  The 
WET program also monitors two important biological parameters: fecal coliform 
bacterial contamination (an indicator of human health risk) and phytoplankton 
productivity (an indicator of estuarine health).  These data have 1) allowed us 
to identify several bacterial hot spots that we will be working to eliminate, 2) 
are used to identify and open areas safe for shellfishing, and 3) have uncovered 
a relation between tides and low dissolved oxygen (a stressful condition for 
marine life) that needs further study.  Our water quality work has contributed 
to the designation of several Priority Watersheds in coastal Southern Maine by 
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. 

Coastal Conservation Strategies

The Coastal Mosaic Project is a new program developed in response to requests 
for support from the conservation community to increase the quantity, quality 
and ecological integrity of conserved lands in our region.  Research staff 
organize and facilitate meetings, workshops, and communications for 18 partner 
conservation groups.  A key element of the Project is the Conservation Resource 
Center, a Reserve staffed GIS facility with a growing database able to 
provide maps of property, natural features and other data needed to develop 
effective conservation goals and strategies.  The Project is nearing completion 
of conservation lands maps for 13 Southern Maine coastal towns, and is 
undertaking an initiative to develop coastal watershed conservation strategies 
for 12 coastal watersheds within these towns.  The Reserve has a particular 
interest in educating communities about the ecologic and economic benefits of 
land conservation, especially along estuarine and riverine shorelines.

Salt Marsh Habitats and Communities

Factors that control the dynamics and vigor of salt marsh plant communities and 
marsh peat formation consequently determine the ability of a salt marsh to 
persist in the face of sea level rise.  Through a combination of experimental 
manipulations and long term monitoring, a number of multi-year studies are 
currently producing data to answer questions concerning the sustainability of 
salt marsh habitats in this region.  These studies are looking at nutrient-plant 
relations, plant community responses to physical and hydrologic disturbance, and 
the relative contribution of short-term natural events (e.g. storms) and human 
activities (dredging, tidal restriction) on patterns of sediment accretion and 
erosion.  The Reserve's marshes and beaches are already among the best studied 
sites in the U.S. with regard to long term accretion and erosion (over thousands 
of years).

HABITAT VALUE FOR FISH, SHELLFISH AND BIRDS

The Reserve combines long-term monitoring with periodic surveys and short-term 
experiments to identify species and measure trends and changes in populations of 
fish, crustaceans, clams and birds.   We have 10 years of data on upland and 
shore birds with which to assess the status of resident and migratory avian 
populations, and 8 years of wading bird data that we use as a gross level 
indicator of salt marsh health, which appears to be stable.  Our periodic 
larval, juvenile and adult fish surveys have produced the best available data 
for fish utilization of salt marsh estuaries in the Gulf of Maine.  In the 
coming year we plan to develop a long-term monitoring program for finfish that 
will be coordinated with other sites within the Gulf of Maine and along 
the east coast.  Since 1994 we have been conducting surveys and field 
experiments to look at the survival and growth of hatchery seed, juvenile and 
adult softshell clam with regard to habitat characteristics and predation by the 
invasive green crab.

Salt Marsh Degradation and Restoration

 Salt marsh ecosystems in the Gulf of Maine have sustained themselves in the 
face of sea-level rise and other natural disturbances for nearly five thousand 
years.  Since colonial times large areas of salt marsh (up to half of the total 
area) have been lost through diking, draining and filling.  Today, the remaining 
marshland is fairly well protected from outright destruction, but during the 
past 100 years, and especially since the 1950's, salt marshes have been divided 
into fragments by roads, causeways, culverts and tide gates.  Most of these 
fragments have severely restricted tidal flow, leading to chronic habitat 
degradation and greatly reduced access for fish and other marine species.  Since 
1991, the Wells Reserve has been studying the impact of these restrictions on 
salt marsh functions and values, and the response of salt marshes to tidal 
restoration.  We have been working to promote an awareness of the damage being 
done and the benefits of salt marsh restoration throughout the Gulf of Maine.

Research Program Update:
In addition to the Reserve-sponsored projects outlined above, numerous visiting 
investigators will be involved in on-site research.  Topics include: the effects 
of land use, sea level, and climate on estuarine productivity; the relationship 
between soil nutrients and plant community patterns; the influence of soil 
salinity on plant community interactions; the effect of tidal restriction on 
marsh peat accretion; the comparative ecology of fringe marshes and back barrier 
marshes; habitat use by upland birds, and the ecology of lyme disease.

 The Wells NERR Research Dept. was just funded to work on the following project 
this spring: 
Community-based plan to manage current and future threats from point and non-
source point pollution in the Merriland River and Branch Brook Watersheds of the 
Little River Estuary.  
There will be a shoreline survey of the Little River and its Watershed this 
March.  The preliminary goal of this project is a)to produce a community-based 
watershed management plan for the Branch Brook, Merriland River, Little River 
combined watersheds, and b)to convey the elements of the plan to critical 
audiences through a succinct road show, culminating in a public 
event to showcase the plan.

 The Wells NERR Research Dept. was also funded this year to work on the 
following project: 
Measuring the Health of the York River Ecosystem using Fish as Indicators.  The 
results of this study will provide information on the ecology and fisheries of 
the York River that is essential for wise stewardship of this precious but 
threatened community resource.  The goal of this project is to assist the York 
Rivers Association and partners in their work as stewards of the York River and 
its watershed, through an assessment of the current and potential fish habitat 
value of this exemplary coastal ecosystem.

The Wells NERR Research Dept. is involved with the following two CICEET 
Projects.
I. Project Title: Estuarine Responses to Dredging: Analysis of Sedimentary and 
Morphological Change in Back Barrier Marsh to Aid Local Management and Develop a 
Regional Management Tool Principal Investigator (s): Michele Dionne, Wells NERR, 
ME; Duncan Fitzgerald, Boston University; Joe Kelley, University of Maine; David 
Burdick and Larry Ward, University of New Hampshire

Management Issue: Coastal management tool for assessing the impacts of dredging 
in estuaries.
Project Summary: An adequate supply of sediment is essential for maintaining 
salt marshes.  Human activities, such as channel dredging and tidal restriction 
due to road construction, can alter water flows in estuaries and result in 
dramatic changes in salt marsh sediment supply, affecting the speed of salt 
marsh erosion.  The objective of this project is to determine the impact of 
dredging and tidal restriction on salt marshes in the Wells NERR.  A digital 
coastal management guide will be created on CD ROM, providing coastal managers 
with useful conceptual models for predicting the impacts of dredging and other 
activities that affect water flow and sediment deposition in salt marshes.

II. Project Title: Application of a Continuous Imaging Flow Cytometer for 
Monitoring Estuarine Microplankton Principal Investigators: Mike Sieracki and 
Chris. Sieracki, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Studies

Management Issue: New technology for detecting harmful algal blooms
Project Summary: Marine plankton is a significant component of highly productive 
estuaries, affecting the distribution of oxygen, nutrients, and contaminants.  
Estuarine marine plankton is also the primary food for the larvae of many 
commercially and ecologically important finfish and shellfish. In addition to 
their highly productive role, some species of plankton occasionally form 
nuisance or toxic blooms that affect human health as well as fish and shellfish. 
This project is developing an imaging system, called FlowCam, to continuously 
monitor plankton for the presence and abundance of harmful algal species.  The 
same technology could also be used to monitor the effects of harbor dredging on 
plankton.

The Wells NERR Research Dept. is assisting with the maintenance and data 
collection of the FlowCAM instrument and FlowCAM computer.

*The following information on CICEET taken directly from its website: 
(http://www.ciceet.unh.edu)


Wells NERR Graduate Research Fellowships (GRF's):
1)Patrick Ewanchuck and Mark Bertness, Ph.D.; Brown University
Project Title: Patch persitence and seedling dynamics in a Southern Maine marsh 
and the process and pattern in western Atlantic salt marsh plant communities: a 
biogeographical perspective.
2)Linday Whitlow, University of Michigan
Project Title: Integration of individual behavior and community dynamics to 
determine mechanisms by which the invasive green crab impacts populations of the 
native soft-shell clam.
3)Pamela Morgan, University of New Hampshire
Project Title: Functions and values of salt marshes in northern New England: a 
comparison of fringing marshes and back barrier marshes.

Other Onsite Research:
Michele Dionne, Wells NERR, Nancy McReel, Chuck Lubelczyk
Project Title: Effect of herbivory by deer on forest regeneration

June Ficker
Project Title: Monitoring avian productivity and survivorship

Outside Researchers:
Theresa Theodose, Ph.D., University of Southern Maine
Project Title: Relationships between soil nutrient availability and species 
composition of a high salt marsh in southern Maine.

David Burdick, Ph.D. and Roelof Boumans, Ph.D.
University of New Hampshire, University of Maryland
Project Title: Sediment dynamics in salt marshes: functional assessment of 
accretionary biofilters

Peter Rand, M.D., Chuck Lubelczyk, Robert Smith, M.D.
Maine Medical Center
Project Title: Ecological determinants of the spread of the tick vector of Lyme 
disease and other pathogens.

This summary was taken from summaries written by Michele Dionne, Research 
Director, and put together and updated from Scott Orringer, Research Associate

Abstracts, Reports and Publications 1997-1999

The following titles describe research, management, education and outreach 
activities to which Reserve staff, visiting investigators, interns, or 
volunteers made contributions.  The nature of these contributions include data 
collection, management, or analysis; authorship; or workshop/committee 
participation.  

Bayse, N. and M. Smith (1999) Landowner options for creating great communities. 
Coastal Mosaic Project, Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve. 4 pages.

Belknap, D. F., and J. T. Kelley (1998) Development of Holocene relative sea-
level curves in Maine:  Geological Society of America Abstracts with Programs, 
v. 30, p. 4-5.

Boumans, R., D. Burdick, and M. Dionne (1999) Modeling habitat change in salt 
marshes following tidal restoration.  Manuscript in review.

Bryan, R., M.Dionne, R. Cook, J. Jones and A. Goodspeed (1997) Maine citizens 
guide to evaluating, restoring, and managing tidal marshes.  Maine Audubon 
Society, Falmouth, ME.

Buchsbaum, R., D.M. Burdick, R. Cook, T. Diers, M. Dionne, K. Hughes, R. Milton, 
H. A. Neckles, L. Roberts, C.T. Roman, J. Taylor, and D. Thompson (1999) 
Standards and criteria for evaluating tidal wetland restoration in the Gulf of 
Maine: workshop results.  Estuarine Research Federation Abstracts with Programs.

Burdick, D. M. , R. M. Boumans, M. Dionne and F. T. Short (1999) Impacts to salt 
marshes from tidal restrictions and ecological responses to tidal restoration .  
Report submitted to the Estuarine Reserves Division, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration.  51 pages plus figures and appendices.

Burdick, D. M., R. M. Boumans, and M. Dionne (1999) Modeling habitat change 
following tidal restoration in New England salt marshes.  Estuarine Research 
Federation Abstracts with Programs.

Burdick, D., M. Dionne, R. Boumans and F. Short (1997) Ecological responses to 
tidal restoration in two New England salt marshes. Wetlands Ecology and 
Management 4:129-144.

Dionne, M. (1999) Fish utilization of salt marsh habitat in the Gulf of Maine.  
Gulf of Maine News (Spring): p 1-7.

Dionne, M., D. Burdick, R. Cook, R. Buchsbaum, and S. Fuller (1998) Scoping 
paper 5: physical alterations to water flow and salt marshes: protecting and 
restoring flow and habitat in Gulf of Maine salt marshes and watersheds.  Final 
draft of a working paper.  Commission for Environmental Cooperation and Global 
Program of Action Coalition for the Gulf of Maine. 68 pp.+ appendices.

Dionne, M., F. Short, and D. Burdick (1998) Fish utilization of restored, 
created and reference salt marsh habitat in the Gulf of Maine. American 
Fisheries Society Symposium 22: Fish habitat: Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) and 
Rehabilitation: 384-404.

Dionne, M. (1997) Animal interactions and secondary productivity in northeastern 
tidal marshes. Pages 19-24 in R. A. Orson, R. S. Warren, W. A. Niering and P.Van 
Patten (eds), Research in New England Marsh-Estuarine cosystems:directions and 
priorities into the next millenium. Connecticut Sea Grant Publications, 
University of Connecticut, Groton.

Dionne, M. (1997) Nutrients and dissolved oxygen in Maine estuaries and 
embayments. Final data report submitted to New England Interstate Water 
Pollution Control Commission.  46 pp including appendices.

Hoffman, C. 1997.  Drakes Island Marsh Restoration Project Report.  Contracted 
out by the Wells	NERR.

Holden, W.F. 1997.  Fresh water, suspended sediment and nutrient influx to the 
Little River and 	Webhannet River Estuaries, Wells, Maine.  Ph.D. dissertation, 
Boston University. pp 1-179

Kelley, J. T., S. M. Dickson, D. F. Belknap and W. A. Barnhardt (1998) Nearshore 
sand volume as a component of littoral sand budgets in Maine, Norhern New 
England, USA: International Coastal Symposium, Coastal Education and Research 
Foundation.  Journal of Coastal Research SI 26, p. A16-A17.

Kelly, J. R. (1997) Dissolved oxygen in Maine estuaries and embayments: 1996 
results and analyses.  Report submitted to Wells National Estuarine Research 
Reserve.  89 pp including appendices.

Maine State Planning Office (1998) Improving Maine¹s beaches: recommendations of 
the Southern Maine Beach stakeholder group. 16 pp.

Miller, G.T., D. F. Belknap, J.T. Kelley, D.M. Fitzgerald (1997)  Ground-
penetrating radar of a coastal moraine compared to seismic reflection profiles 
of moraines preserved on the inner shelf off Southwestern Maine.  Abstracts with 
Program -Geological Society of America 29: 67.

Morgan, P. A. and F. T. Short (1999) Functions and values of fringing salt 
marshes in northern New England. New England Estuarine Research Society 
Abstracts (spring meeting).

Moser, Susanne (1998) Talk globally, walk locally: the cross-scale influence of 
global change information on coastal zone management in Maine and Hawaii.  ENRP 
Discussion Paper E-98-16, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. 60 
pp.  [the Wells NERR was one of many interviewees that contributed to this 
study.]

Rand, P. W., E. H. LaCombe, R. P. Smith, Jr., and J. Ficker (1998).  
Participation of birds Aves in the emergence of lyme disease in Southern Maine.  
Journal of Medical Entomology 35: 270-276.

Short, F. T. (1997) New England Estuarine Society Spring Meeting held at the 
Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve, Wells, Maine.  Environmental 
Conservation 24: 291-292.

Short, F. T., C. A. Short, R. C. Davis,  D. M. Burdick, and P. Morgan (1998) 
Developing success criteria for multiple estuarine habitats.  Abstracts with 
Program -Goal Setting and Success Criteria for Habitat Restoration, Charleston, 
S.C.

Sinson, D. A., D. F. Belknap, and J. T. Kelley (1998)  Shoreface vibracore 
analysis:  Wells embayment, southern Maine: Geological Society of America 
Abstracts with Programs, v. 30, p. 74.

Smith, M. (1999) Southern Maine Coastal Mosaic habitat conservation project.  
Coastal Mosaic Project, Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve.  5 pages plus 
maps and appendices.

Theodose, T. A. (1999) Nutrient availability, nutrient limitation, and species 
diversity in salt marsh forb communities.  New England Estuarine Research 
Society Abstracts (spring meeting).

Theodose, T. A. and J. B. Roths (1999).   Relationships between nutrient 
availability. stress and diversity on two New England salt marshes.  Plant 
Ecology.  In press.

Theodose, T. A. (1997) Relationships between stress, nutrient availability, and 
plant community diversity on two high salt marshes in southern Maine.  
Ecological Society of America Abstracts.

Theodose, T.A. (1997) Spatial variation in soil nutrient availability, 
production, and plant species diversity on two high salt marshes in southern 
Maine.  New England Estuarine Research Society Abstracts (spring meeting).

Wade, Stephen (1999) Effects of tidal restriction on elevation and plant 
communities in five tidal marshes in Wells and Kennebunk, Maine.  Masters 
Project, Antioch New England Graduate School.  23 pages plus figures and maps.

Ward, L. G. 1993.  Precipitation, streamflow, and water characteristics 
(physical and chemical) of the Webhannet River Estuary, Wells, Maine.  Draft 
final report by UNH, Jackson Estuarine Laboratory, Durham, NH.  NOAA Technical 
Memorandum, pp. 1-13.

WNERR RMA 1996.  Wells NERR Management Plan.  Prepared by the WNERR Management 
Authority (RMA) and NOAA, SRD Division.  pp. 1-120.

Whitlow, Lindsay (1999) Size-dependent vulnerability of soft-shell clams to 
predation by the invasive green crab in Wells, ME.  Abstracts Program.  1st 
National Conference on Marine Bioinvasions.

Wood, Robert (1998) Town of Wells softshell clam program: options and 
recommendations.  Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve, Wells, ME.  9 pp.

II.  Physical Structure Descriptors

8.  Variable sequence, range of measurements, units, resolution, and accuracy:

a. YSI 6000 datalogger

Variable      Range of Measurements          Resolution           Accuracy
Date          1-12, 1-31, 00-99 (Mo,Day,Yr)  1 mo, 1 day, 1 yr    NA
Time          0-24, 0-60, 0-60 (Hr,Min,Sec)  1 hr, 1 min, 1 s     NA
Temp               -5 to 45 (c)              0.01  C              +/-0.15C
Sp COND            0-100(mS/cm)              0.01mS/cm            +/-0.5% Of 
reading + 0.001mS/Cm
Salinity      0-70 Parts per thousand (ppt)  0.01 ppt             +/- 1% of 
Reading or 0.1 ppt, (whichever is greater)
DO            0-200 (% air saturation)       0.1% @air sat        +/-2% @air 
Saturation
DO            200-500 (% air saturation      0.1% @ air sat       +/- 6% @ 
Saturation
DO                 0-20 (mg/l)               0.01 mg/l            +/- 0.2mg/l
DO                 20-50 (mg/l)              0.01 mg/l            +/- 0.6mg/l
Depth (shallow)    0-9.1 (m)                 0.001m               +/- 0.018m
PH                 2-14 units                0.01 units           +/- 0.2units
Turb               0-1000 NTU                0.1 NTU              +/- 5% of 
Reading or 2 NTU (whichever is greater)

Data columns are separated by tabs.  Each file contains a two line
column header at the top of the page which identifies measurements and 
units for each column.

9.  Coded variable indicator and variable code definitions:

Site definitions:	HT = Head of Tide of Webhannet River 
			IN = Inlet at Webhannet River Mouth

File definitions:  YSI deployment site/month/year (ex.: IN0700 = Webhannet Inlet 
data from July 2000).


10.  Data anomalies:

January, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: None to report; sonde not deployed until April.

Inlet: 
The following was a high positive turbidity spike that was not consistent with 
the overall data record. This suspect datum was not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that this value was bad.
1/16 16:30 (143.3)

February, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: None to report; sonde not deployed until April.

Inlet: 
The following was a high positive turbidity spike that was not consistent with 
the overall data record. This suspect datum was not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that this value was bad.
2/19 10:30 (65.6)

March, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: None to report; sonde not deployed until April.

Inlet: 
There was a gradually increasing and decreasing range of high positive turbidity 
spikes (50.0 NTU) that occurred throughout deployment, from 3/8 6:00 through 
3/31 23:30 (1014 values with a range from 50.1 to 597.1 NTU; mean of 183.17 NTU) 
that were not consistent with the overall data record.  These suspect data were 
not deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad (the post 
calibration checked out normal).  This may have been due to the snowmelt 
accompanied by the astronomical high tides.
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 1.5 to 3.0 mg/l, 
mean of 2.3 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 14.1 to 29.0%, mean of 
22.2%) during several low tide and high tide fluctuations that were not 
consistent with the overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to 
the consistency of the overall data record).  These suspect data were not 
deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other 
parameters, the dissolved oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
3/30 15:00
3/31 1:30-4:30, 14:30-17:00
The following are episodes of high dissolved oxygen (range from 11.1 to 13.5 
mg/l, mean of 12.2 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 110.0 to 132.4%, 
mean of 115.0%) during several low tide and high tide fluctuations that were not 
consistent with the overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to 
the consistency of the overall data record).  These suspect data were not 
deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other 
parameters, the dissolved oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
3/1 11:30-12:30, 17:30-20:30
3/2 11:00-13:30, 18:30-21:30, 22:30-23:00
3/3 0:00, 7:30-9:30, 11:00-15:00, 16:00-18:30
3/4 13:00-19:00
3/5 12:00-23:30
3/6 0:00-1:30, 9:00-23:30
3/7 0:00-3:30, 9:30-23:30
3/8 0:00-7:00, 10:00, 22:30-23:30
3/9 0:00-5:30, 10:30-23:30
3/10 0:00-5:30, 11:30-23:30
3/11 0:00-5:00
3/11 12:30-19:00
3/12 0:30-5:30, 13:00-20:00
3/13 1:30-6:30, 14:00-23:00
3/14 2:00-9:30, 15:30-22:00
3/15 3:30-13:00, 14:00-19:00
3/16 5:00-23:00
3/17 6:00-11:00, 19:30-20:00
3/18 8:00-23:30
3/19 0:00, 8:30-23:30
3/20 0:00-1:00, 8:30-
3/20 18:00-23:30
3/21 0:00-2:00, 9:30-23:30
3/22 0:00-3:00, 10:00-23:30
3/23 0:00-4:00, 11:00-23:30
3/24 0:00-4:30, 12:00-22:00
3/25 0:00-3:00, 4:30, 12:30-19:30, 20:30
3/26 0:30-6:30, 12:30-16:30, 17:30-20:00
3/27 1:30-4:30, 6:00-6:30
3/27 14:00-17:30, 18:30-21:00
3/28 2:00-5:30, 15:00-18:00
3/29 4:00-5:30, 7:00-7:30
3/31 18:00-20:30

April, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: 
Small negative and/or zero turbidity values were collected sporadically 
throughout the following time span: 4/13 17:30-4/21 18:00 (logging period 
recorded 306 anomalies), possibly due to a small calibration error.  These data 
were not deleted.
The following are shallow positive depth data (133 values with a range of 0.01 
to 0.09 m; mean of 0.06 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted.
4/15 11:00-21:00, 23:30
4/16 0:00-9:00, 12:00-21:00
4/17 1:00-2:30, 4:00-5:30, 15:30-16:30
4/20 3:30-12:00, 15:30-23:30
4/21 4:00-12:30, 16:00-20:00
There was a continuous range of high positive turbidity spikes that occurred 
after an initial high spike of 132.6 NTU on 4/22 5:00, from 4/22 5:30 through 
4/30 23:30 (422 values with a range from 14.4 to 81.2 NTU; mean of 24.17) that 
were not consistent with the overall data record.  These suspect data were not 
deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad (the post 
calibration checked out normal). (Although this value range would not normally 
be labeled anomalous as they are not considerably high spikes, they are included 
in this range because of continuously stabilized values after the initial high 
spike on 4/22 5:00). 

Inlet:
There was a gradually increasing and decreasing range of high positive turbidity 
spikes from 4/1 0:00 throughout 4/6 12:00 (continued from 3/8 6:00; see above) 
(264 values with a range from 125.6 to 278.7 NTU; mean of 189 NTU) that were not 
consistent with the overall data record.  These suspect data were not deleted, 
as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad (the post calibration 
checked out normal).  This may have been due to the snowmelt accompanied by the 
astronomical high tides.
The following was a range of low negative dissolved oxygen and percent 
saturation data.  These suspect data were deleted (although the post calibration 
checked out normal), as these readings were out of the probe's acceptable range.
4/5 16:00-17:00.
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 0.0 to 3.1 mg/l, 
mean of 0.7 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 0.0 to 30.0%, mean of 6.9%) 
during several low tide and high tide fluctuations that were not consistent with 
the overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to the consistency 
of the overall data record).  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other parameters, the dissolved 
oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
4/1 2:00-5:00, 14:00-17:30
4/2 2:30-6:30, 16:00-18:30
4/3 2:30-7:00, 15:00-19:30
4/4 3:00-6:30, 7:30, 15:30-19:30
4/5 0:30, 2:00-8:30, 11:00-13:30, 14:30-15:30, 17:30-21:30, 23:00-23:30
4/6 0:00-10:00, 12:00
No data collected from 4/6 12:30 through 4/13 17:30 due to a telemetry unit 
crash; caused by a major leak through the vented-level cable causing data sonde 
corrosion at the cable/sonde interface.  From 4/13 18:00 through 5/30 9:30 a 
non-vented level YSI 6000 was used in its place, as both the vented-level cable 
and YSI 6600 were sent back to YSI for repairs.
No dissolved oxygen data or percent saturation data on the following dates/times 
due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe malfunction 
4/13 18:00-4/24 5:30
4/27 11:30-4/30 23:30
The following were two high positive turbidity spikes that were not consistent 
with the overall data record.  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are 
not absolutely sure that these values were bad.
4/22 11:30 (147.3)
4/22 12:00 (42.5)

May, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
The following are shallow positive depth data (386 values with a range of 0.00 
to 0.09 m; mean of 0.06 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted.
5/1 19:30-20:30
5/2 0:00-9:00
5/5 15:00-23:00
5/6 22:30-23:30
5/7 0:00, 5:00-13:00, 16:30
5/8 1:00, 7:00-14:00, 17:00-23:30
5/9 0:00-2:00, 7:00-15:00, 18:30-23:30
5/10 0:00-2:30
5/11 2:30-3:00
5/13 3:30, 15:00-19:00, 23:00-23:30
5/14 0:00-6:00, 5:30-11:00, 13:30-14:30, 21:30-23:00
5/21 18:30-23:30
5/22 0:00-1:00, 4:00-14:30, 15:30, 16:30-23:30
5/23 0:00-2:00, 5:00-23:30
5/24 0:00, 2:30, 5:00, 10:00-12:00
5/25 9:30-10:30, 11:30-15:30
5/27 11:00-23:30
5/28 0:00-6:30, 8:30-19:00, 21:00-23:30
5/29 0:00-6:30
5/31 14:30-20:30
The following are shallow negative depth data (44 values with a range of -0.01 
to -0.05 m; mean of -0.03 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted.
5/7 17:00-23:30
5/8 0:00-0:30, 6:00-6:30
5/18 15:00-21:00
5/24 0:00-2:00, 5:30-8:30
The following were high positive turbidity spikes that were not consistent with 
the overall data record. This suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values were bad.
5/5 1:00	(56.50), 1:30 (51.20), 3:00	(65.80)
5/6 2:00	(94.10), 3:30 (72.80), 4:00	(103.00)
5/7 2:30	(99.90), 3:00 (75.30), 3:30	(63.20)
5/8 3:00 (96.20), 3:30 (90.30), 4:00	(78.70), 4:30 (72.70), 6:00	(60.80)
5/9 4:30	(68.80), 5:00 (60.70), 5:30	(64.40), 6:00 (52.20), 6:30	(51.70), 
7:00 (73.60)
5/10 5:30 (77.00), 6:00 (59.70), 8:00 (59.60), 23:30 (51.50)
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 0.0 to 3.3 mg/l, 
mean of 0.8 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 0.2 to 29.0%, mean of 7.0%) 
during several low tide and high tide fluctuations that were not consistent with 
the overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to the consistency 
of the overall data record).  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other parameters, the dissolved 
oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
5/20 14:30
5/21 1:00-4:00
5/22 3:00-3:30
5/23 3:00-4:00
5/23 13:30-20:00, 21:30-23:30
5/24 0:00-7:00, 9:00-9:30
5/29 21:00-22:00
5/30 21:00-23:30
5/31 10:00-12:00, 20:00-23:00

Inlet:
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 5/1 0:00 
through 5/31 23:30 due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe 
malfunction. 
No data collected on 5/3 11:00 due to a data gap.  Logger did not record data 
within this time range, possibly due to an overwrite of data.
pH data suspect 5/6 23:30 - 5/30 9:30 for unknown reason. Data drops to 6.2 for 
some time, possibly due to melting of snow in area. Post calibration good. Data 
were retained.
The following was a high positive turbidity spike that was not consistent with 
the overall data record. This suspect datum was not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that this value was bad.
5/20 1:00 (257.1)
No turbidity data from 5/30 2:30-9:30 due to a turbidity probe malfunction.

June, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
There was a continuous range of high positive turbidity spikes that occurred 
after an initial high spike of 132.6 NTU on 4/22 5:00, from 6/1 0:00 to 6/2 
13:30 (a continuation from 4/22 5:30 through 5/31 23:30) (78 values with a range 
from 22.5 to 202.10 NTU; mean of 47.22) that were not consistent with the 
overall data record.  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values are bad (the post calibration checked out 
normal).
Small negative and/or zero turbidity values were collected sporadically 
throughout the following time span: 6/2 16:00-6/28 19:30 (logging period 
recorded 1028 anomalies), possibly due to a small calibration error. These data 
were not deleted.
The following are shallow positive depth data (56 values with a range of 0.0 to 
0.09 m; mean of 0.02 m). Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted.
6/1 0:30-9:30, 12:30-21:00
6/2 2:00-10:30, 13:30
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 0.0 to 3.0 mg/l, 
mean of 1.1 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 0.0 to 35.5%, mean of 
12.6%) during several low tide and high tide fluctuations that were not 
consistent with the overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to 
the consistency of the overall data record).  These suspect data were not 
deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other 
parameters, the dissolved oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.  These 
episodes are a continuation from the May 2000 deployment (see above).
6/1 0:00-23:30
6/2 7:30, 13:30
6/3 14:00
6/27 20:30-23:00
6/28 23:00-23:30
6/29 0:00-8:30, 10:00-19:30
6/30 0:00-9:30, 11:30-21:00

Inlet:
No data collected on the following dates/times; due to a data gap.  Logger 
either (1) did not record data within this time range, possibly due to an 
overwrite of data; or (2) did record the same data values because of an 
overwrite (these data were deleted).
6/5 10:30-23:30
6/6 0:00-23:30
6/7 0:00-16:00
No turbidity data from 6/7 16:30 through 6/30 23:30 due to a turbidity probe 
malfunction.

July, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: 
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 1.3 to 3.2 mg/l, 
mean of 2.4 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 16.3 to 35.4%, mean of 
28.0%) during several low tide and high tide fluctuations that were not 
consistent with the overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to 
the consistency of the overall data record).  These suspect data were not 
deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other 
parameters, the dissolved oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were 
good.  These episodes are a continuation from the June 2000 deployment (see 
above).
7/1 2:30-10:30, 13:30-22:00
7/2 4:30-11:30, 15:00-22:30
7/3 4:30-12:00, 16:00-23:00
7/4 4:30-13:00, 16:30-23:30
7/5 0:00-0:30, 5:00-14:00, 19:00-21:30, 22:30-23:30
7/6 0:00-1:30, 5:30-14:30, 19:30-21:00, 23:30
7/7 0:00-3:00, 6:00-13:00, 14:00-15:30, 20:30
7/8 0:30-4:00, 6:30-9:00, 14:30
7/9 1:30, 3:00-5:30, 7:00-8:00, 9:00-9:30, 10:30-11:00, 12:00-14:30, 15:30, 
16:30-17:30
7/10 1:30, 3:00-7:00, 8:00-9:00, 16:00-18:30
7/11 2:00-2:30, 3:30-4:30, 5:30-6:00, 7:00-10:00, 11:00, 14:30-16:00, 17:00-
19:30
7/12 2:00-2:30, 3:30, 5:30-7:00, 8:00-9:30, 11:00
7/13 4:30, 6:00, 7:00-8:30, 9:30, 15:00, 20:30
7/14 5:00-10:30, 15:00, 18:30, 20:00-21:30
7/15 4:30, 6:00, 7:00-7:30, 9:00, 11:00-11:30, 19:30, 20:30-22:00
7/16 5:30-8:30
The following were two high positive turbidity spikes that were not consistent 
with the overall data record.  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are 
not absolutely sure that these values were bad.
7/1 5:00 (230.4)
7/1 22:30 (130.2)
Small negative and/or zero turbidity values were collected sporadically 
throughout the following time span: 7/18 13:00-7/31 12:00 (logging period 
recorded 377 anomalies), possibly due to a small calibration error.  These data 
were not deleted.

Inlet:
No turbidity data from 7/1 0:00 through 7/5 8:30 due to a turbidity probe 
malfunction.
No data collected on 7/1 2:00 due to a data gap.  Sonde did not record data 
within this time range, possibly due to an overwrite of data.
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 7/1 2:30 
through 7/5 8:30 due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe 
malfunction.
There is missing data from 7/5 9:00 through 7/27 18:00 due to a telemetry unit 
battery crash, and due to downtime for calibration, maintenance, and 
downloading.
Small negative turbidity values were recorded throughout the following time 
span: 7/27 19:00-7/31 22:00 (logging period recorded 186 anomalies), possibly 
due to a small calibration error.  These data were not deleted.
The following was a high positive turbidity spike that was not consistent with 
the overall data record.  This suspect datum was not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that this value was bad.
7/31 23:30 (147.5)


August, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
Small negative and/or zero turbidity values were collected sporadically 
throughout the following time span: 8/2 2:00-8/25 19:00 (logging period recorded 
510 anomalies), possibly due to a small calibration error.  These data 
were not deleted.
The following was a high positive turbidity spike that was not consistent with 
the overall data record. This suspect datum was not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that this values was bad.
8/27 8:00 (78.3)
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 0.1 to 3.1 mg/l, 
mean of 1.4 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 1.0 to 35.2%, mean of 
16.2%) during several low tide and high tide fluctuations that were not 
consistent with the overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to 
the consistency of the overall data record).  These suspect data were not 
deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other 
parameters, the dissolved oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
8/26 10:30
8/27 3:30-6:30, 9:00, 14:00-20:00
8/28 6:00-10:00, 17:00-21:00
The following was a range of low negative dissolved oxygen and percent 
saturation data.  These suspect data were deleted (although the post calibration 
checked out normal), as these readings were out of the probe¹s acceptable range.
8/27 7:00-8:30
The following are shallow positive depth data (144 values with a range of 0.04 
to 0.09 m; mean of 0.07 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted
8/7 9:30-16:30, 20:30
8/8 14:30-17:30
8/9 3:00-3:30, 4:30-5:30, 7:00, 8:30-18:30, 22:00-23:30
8/10 0:00-8:30, 9:30-19:00
8/26 3:30-4:30, 12:30-19:00
8/27 0:00-8:30, 12:00-20:00

Inlet:
Small negative and/or zero turbidity values were recorded throughout the 
following time span: 8/1 0:00-8/17 3:30 (logging period recorded 221 anomalies), 
possibly due to a small calibration error.  These data were not deleted.
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 1.2 to 3.1 mg/l, 
mean of 2.4 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 15.1 to 38.3%, mean of 
30.5%) during several low tide fluctuations that were not consistent with the 
overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to the consistency of 
the overall data record).  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other parameters, the dissolved 
oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
8/1 7:30, 8:30
8/11 5:00
8/12 6:30
8/25 4:00
8/26 4:30
8/27 5:00, 6:00
8/28 4:30-5:00, 6:30-7:00
8/29 5:30-6:00, 7:30-8:00
8/30 6:30-7:00, 8:00-9:00, 19:00, 21:00
8/31 7:00-9:30, 19:00
The following were 10 high positive turbidity spikes ("50 NTU), including one 
roll over episode (>1000 NTU), that were not consistent with the overall data 
record (range from 50.4-1585.8 NTU, mean of 332.63 NTU).  This suspect data were 
not deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values were bad.
8/1 11:30
8/2 0:30
8/3 0:30, 1:30, 12:30
8/17 7:00, 8:00-8:30, 12:00
8/18 12:00
No turbidity data from 8/18 16:00 through 8/31 23:30 due to a turbidity probe 
malfunction.

September, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
The following are shallow positive depth data (186 values with a range of 0.01 
to 0.09 m; mean of 0.06 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted
9/1 12:30, 16:30-23:30
9/2 0:00-1:00, 5:00-7:30, 9:00, 12:00-13:00, 17:30-23:30
9/3 0:00-2:00, 5:30-14:00, 18:00-23:30
9/4 0:00-3:00, 6:00-15:00, 19:00-21:30
9/8 10:30-19:30, 22:00-23:30
9/9 0:00-8:00, 15:00-19:00
9/15 3:00-11:30, 15:30-18:30, 23:00-23:30
9/16 4:00
The following was a range of low negative dissolved oxygen and percent 
saturation data.  These suspect data were deleted (although the post calibration 
checked out normal), as these readings were out of the probe¹s acceptable range.
9/6 3:00-5:00
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 1.7 to 3.1 mg/l, 
mean of 2.67 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 19.3 to 37.8%, mean of 
32.76%) during several low tide fluctuations that were not consistent with the 
overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to the consistency of 
the overall data record).  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other parameters, the dissolved 
oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
9/1 4:00, - 8:30, 12:00
9/2 0:00-1:30, 3:00-13:30
9/3 00:30, 2:00-2:30, 10:30 - 13:00
9/4 2:00-3:30, 23:00, 23:30
9/5 0:00-13:30, 21:00-23:30
9/6 0:00-2:30, 5:30-13:00
9/10 2:30-3:30, 4:30 - 8:30
9/14 20:00-23:30
9/15 4:30-10:30
No data collected from 9/21 13:00 through 9/30 23:30 due to a major battery 
crash, where battery voltage dropped quickly from 12.5 to 6.0 volts within 
approximately a 7 day span.  Possible causes of this crash (after conferring 
with YSI engineers) include static electricity from a car seat prior to 
deployment or a nearby lightning strike.

Inlet: 
Small negative and/or zero turbidity values were recorded throughout the 
following time span: 9/14 17:30 to 9/30 7:00 (logging period recorded 650 
anomalies), possibly due to a small calibration error.  These data were not 
deleted.
The following are episodes of low dissolved oxygen (range from 1.0 to 3.0 mg/l, 
mean of 2.3 mg/l) and percent saturation (range from 12.0 to 38.1%, mean of 
29.2%) during several low tide fluctuations that were not consistent with the 
overall data record (at high tide the readings returned to the consistency of 
the overall data record).  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values are bad.  Other parameters, the dissolved 
oxygen post-cal, and recalibration were good.
9/1 7:30-10:30
9/2 8:30-11:00, 20:00, 21:30
9/3 8:00-11:30, 20:30-23:00
9/4 0:00, 9:00-12:00, 21:30-23:30
9/5 0:30, 23:00
9/6 2:30, 11:00, 12:30-14:30, 23:30
9/7 0:00, 2:30
9/8 3:00-4:30, 14:30-15:30
9/9 2:30-4:00, 5:00, 15:00
9/10 4:00-6:00

October, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
No data collected from 10/1 0:00 through 10/31 23:30 due to a major battery 
crash (a continuation from the 9/21 13:00 crash), where battery voltage dropped 
quickly from 12.5 to 6.0 volts within approximately a 7 day span.  Possible 
causes of this crash (after conferring with YSI engineers) include static 
electricity from a car seat prior to deployment or a nearby lightning strike.

Inlet: 
Small negative and/or zero turbidity values were recorded throughout the 
following time span: 10/13 12:00 to 10/30 9:00 (logging period recorded 19 
anomalies), possibly due to a small calibration error.  These data were not 
deleted.
The following are 62 suspect dissolved oxygen and percent saturation values, due 
to high outliers not consistent with the overall data record (range from 
10.6mg/L and 121.2% to 16.1 mg/l and 185.4%, mean of 12.9 mg/l and 147.0%).  
Although these suspect values were not consistent with the overall data record, 
they 
were not deleted; as other parameters, the dissolved oxygen post-cal, and 
recalibration were good.   
10/8 10:30-23:30
10/9 0:00-6:00
10/10 8:00-18:30
The following were high positive turbidity spikes (>50 NTU), that were not 
consistent with the overall data record (range from 62.8-775.3 NTU), mean of 
344.52 NTU.  This suspect data were not deleted, as we are not absolutely sure 
that these values were bad.
10/4 11:00 (67.00), 15:00 (65.80)
10/8 17:30 (751.70)
10/8 18:00 (775.30)
10/31	11:30	(62.80)

November, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
No data collected from 11/1 0:00 to 11/14 14:30 due to a major battery crash (a 
continuation from the 9/21 13:00 crash), where battery voltage dropped quickly 
from 12.5 to 6.0 volts within approximately a 7 day span.  Possible causes of 
this crash (after conferring with YSI engineers) include static electricity 
from a car seat prior to deployment or a nearby lightning strike.  Also, no data 
due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and downloading.
The following are shallow positive depth data (145 values with a range of 0.0 to 
0.09 m; mean of 0.05 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted:
11/15	0:30, 3:00, 12:00
11/16	2:30
11/17	14:30
11/18	15:30, 17:30
11/19	5:30, 16:30, 18:30
11/20	5:30, 17:30, 18:00, 19:30
11/21	7:00-8:00
11/21	19:30-20:00
11/22	20:00-21:30
11/23	8:00
11/26	22:30-23:00
11/27	1:00-10:30
11/27	14:00-23:30
11/28	0:00-11:30, 14:00-23:30
11/29	0:00-12:30, 14:30-17:30
11/30	13:00-13:30, 15:00
The following are shallow negative depth data (111 values with a range of -0.01 
to ­0.12 m; mean of -0.04 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted.
11/14 21:30-23:30
11/15	0:00, 3:30-11:30, 16:00-23:30
11/16	0:00-2:00
11/16	3:00-13:00, 16:00-23:30
11/17	0:00-8:00, 14:00, 17:00
11/21	6:30, 19:00
11/22	7:00-7:30, 9:30
11/24	9:00
11/26	20:00-22:00
The following were 15 high positive turbidity spikes ("50 NTU), some of these a 
continuous range, that were not consistent with the overall data record (range 
from 50.6-572.4 NTU, mean of 222.88 NTU).  
This suspect data were not deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these 
values were bad.
11/15	8:30, 10:30	
11/24	9:00-11:00	
11/27	2:30, 5:00, 6:30, 8:00, 11:00, 14:00, 16:30	
11/28	18:00	
No data collected on the following dates/times; due to a data gap.  The sonde 
did not collect data at these intervals:
11/25 0:30, 5:00, 8:00

Inlet:
There was a continuous range of high positive turbidity spikes from 11/1 0:00 
throughout 11/29 9:30; 621 values with a range from 10.0 to 423.7 NTU; mean of 
32.8) that were not consistent with the overall data record.  These suspect data 
were not deleted, as we are not absolutely sure that these values are bad 
(the post calibration checked out normal).  
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 11/6 19:30 to 
11/16 12:00, and 11/18 2:00 to 11/30 23:30 due to a suspected DO membrane 
puncture or tear and probe malfunction; and a high DO charge on retrieval. 
There were two small negative and/or zero turbidity values on 11/21 19:30 and 
11/25 10:30, possibly due to a small calibration error.  These data were not 
deleted.


December, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
The following are shallow negative depth data (5 values with a range of -0.01 to 
­0.14 m; mean of -0.09 m).  Sonde probes suspected to be underwater as other 
parameters check out normal.  These data were not deleted.
12/08	7:00 - 7:30, 8:30-9:00
The following were shallow negative depth data where there is suspect that sonde 
was out of the water, possibly due to ice in the holding tube from very cold and 
negative temperatures; from low specific conductivity and salinity data and high 
turbidity observations.  All data were suspect and deleted.
12/2 22:00-23:30
12/3 0:00-10:00
12/4 4:30-9:00, 22:00-23:30
12/5 0:00-9:30, 17:30-23:30
12/6 0:00, 1:00, 4:30-11:30, 16:00-23:30
12/7 0:00 - 12:30, 16:00-23:30
12/8 0:00-6:30, 8:00, 10:00-23:30
12/9 0:00-3:00
The following were shallow positive depth data where there is suspect that sonde 
was out of the water, possibly due to ice in the holding tube from very cold and 
negative temperatures; from low specific conductivity and salinity data and high 
turbidity observations.  All data were suspect and deleted.
12/1 0:00-13:30, 15:30-23:30
12/2 0:00-21:30
12/3 10:30-23:30
12/4 0:00-4:00
12/4 9:30-21:30
12/5 10:00-17:00
12/6 0:30, 1:30-4:00
12/6 12:00-15:30
12/7 13:00-15:30
12/8	9:30
No data from 12/9 3:30 to 12/31 23:30. This datalogger was pulled for the year 
(winter months) to prevent ice damage.

Inlet:
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 12/1 0:00 
through 12/31 23:30 due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe 
malfunction; and a high DO charge on retrieval (a continuation from the 11/18 
2:00 probe crash.) 
The following were high positive turbidity spikes that were not consistent with 
the overall data record.  These suspect data were not deleted, as we are not 
absolutely sure that these values were bad.
12/13	3:30 (97.70)
12/18	11:00 (51.50), 14:30 (130.70)

11.  Missing data:

January, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: None to report; sonde not deployed until April.

Inlet:
No missing data due to downtime for calibration, maintenance, and downloading.

February, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: None to report; sonde not deployed until April.

Inlet:
No missing data due to downtime for calibration, maintenance, and downloading; 
used extra sonde to limit missing data.

March, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: None to report; sonde not deployed until April.

Inlet:
No data collected on the following dates/times due to a data gap.  Logger did 
not record data possibly due to an overwrite of data.
3/15 19:30-23:30
3/16 0:00-3:00
No data from 3/8 10:30-22:00 due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.
No data from 3/29 10:00-20:30 due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.

April, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: 
No data on 4/1 0:00 to 4/13 16:30; this was the first logger deployment (4/13 at 
17:00) at this site for 2000.

Inlet:
No data collected on the following dates/times due to a data gap.  Logger did 
not record data possibly due to an overwrite of data.
4/5 9:00, 14:00
4/6 11:30
4/18 11:00
The following is missing dissolved oxygen data and percent saturation data:
4/5 16:00-17:00
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data on the following 
dates and times due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe 
malfunction 
4/13 18:00-4/24 5:30
4/27 11:30-4/30 23:30
No data collected from 4/6 12:30 through 4/13 17:30 due to a telemetry unit 
crash; caused by a major leak through the vented-level cable causing data sonde 
corrosion at the cable/sonde interface.
No data from 4/24 6:00 to 4/27 11:00 due to downtime for calibration, 
maintenance and downloading.

May, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
There are no missing data due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.

Inlet:
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 5/1 0:00 
through 5/31 23:30 due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe 
malfunction.
No data collected on 5/3 11:00 due to a data gap.  Logger did not record data 
within this time range, possibly due to an overwrite of data.
No turbidity data from 5/30 2:30-9:30 due to a turbidity probe malfunction.
No data from 5/30 10:00 through 5/31 23:30 due to downtime for calibration, 
maintenance, and downloading

June, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
No data from 6/2 14:00-15:00 due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.

Inlet:
No data from 6/1 0:00 through 6/2 15:00 due to downtime for calibration, 
maintenance and downloading.
No data collected on the following dates/times; due to a data gap.  Logger 
either (1) did not record data within this time range, possibly due to an 
overwrite of data; or (2) did record the same data values because of an 
overwrite (these data were deleted).
6/5 10:30-23:30
6/6 0:00-23:30
6/7 0:00-16:00
No turbidity data from 6/7 16:30 through 6/30 23:30 due to a turbidity probe 
malfunction.

July, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide: 
No data from 7/27 10:30-18:30 due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.

Inlet:
No turbidity data from 7/1 0:00 through 7/5 8:30 due to a turbidity probe 
malfunction.
No data collected on 7/1 2:00 due to a data gap.  Logger  did not record data 
within this time range, possibly due to an overwrite of data.
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 7/1 2:30 
through 7/5 8:30 due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe 
malfunction There is missing data from 7/5 9:00 through 7/27 18:00 due to a 
telemetry unit battery crash, and due to downtime for calibration, maintenance, 
and downloading.

August, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
There are no missing data due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.
No dissolved oxygen data and percent saturation data from 8/27 7:00-8:30.

Inlet:
There are no missing data due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.
No turbidity data from 8/18 16:00 through 8/31 23:30 due to a turbidity probe 
malfunction.

September, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
No dissolved oxygen data or percent saturation data from 9/6 3:00-5:00.
No data from 9/11 12:30-9/14 16:30 due to downtime for calibration, maintenance 
and downloading.
No data collected from 9/21 13:00 through 9/30 23:30 due to a major battery 
crash, where battery voltage dropped quickly from 12.5 to 6.0 volts within 
approximately a 7 day span.  Possible causes of this crash (after conferring 
with YSI engineers) include static electricity from a car seat prior to 
deployment or a nearby lightning strike.

Inlet:
No turbidity data from 9/1 0:00 through 9/11 11:00 due to a turbidity probe 
malfunction.
No data from 9/11 11:30 to 9/14 17:00 due to downtime for calibration, 
maintenance and downloading.


October, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
No data collected from 10/1 0:00 through 10/31 23:30 due to a major battery 
crash (a continuation from the 9/21 13:00 crash), where battery voltage dropped 
quickly from 12.5 to 6.0 volts within approximately a 7 day span.  Possible 
causes of this crash (after conferring with YSI engineers) include static 
electricity from a car seat prior to deployment or a nearby lightning strike.

Inlet: 
There are no missing data due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.

November, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
No data collected from 11/1 0:00 to 11/14 15:00 due to a major battery crash (a 
continuation from the 9/21 13:00 crash), where battery voltage dropped quickly 
from 12.5 to 6.0 volts within approximately a 7 day span.  Possible causes of 
this crash (after conferring with YSI engineers) include static electricity 
from a car seat prior to deployment or a nearby lightning strike. No data due to 
downtime for calibration, maintenance and downloading.
The following were shallow negative depth data where there is suspect that sonde 
was out of the water, possibly due to ice in the holding tube from very cold and 
negative temperatures; from low specific conductivity and salinity data and high 
turbidity observations.  All data were suspect and deleted.
11/14 15:00-21:00
11/17 8:30-13:30, 17:30-23:30
11/18 0:00-6:00
11/20 20:30-23:30
11/21 0:00-6:00, 8:30-18:30, 20:30-23:30
11/22 0:00-6:30, 10:00-16:00
11/24 2:00-8:30, 21:00-23:30
11/25 0:00-9:30
11/26 19:30
The following were shallow positive depth data where there is suspect that sonde 
was out of the water, possibly due to ice in the holding tube from very cold and 
negative temperatures; from low specific conductivity and salinity data and high 
turbidity observations.  All data were suspect and deleted.
11/18 6:30-15:00, 18:00-23:30
11/19 0:00-5:00, 6:00-16:00, 19:00-23:30
11/20 0:00-5:00, 7:30-17:00, 20:00
11/22 16:30-19:30, 22:00-23:30
11/23 0:00-7:30, 10:30-20:30, 22:30-23:30
11/24 0:00-1:30, 11:30-20:30
11/25 10:00-23:30
11/26 0:00-11:30, 13:00-19:00
11/29 18:00-23:30
11/30 0:00-12:30, 15:30-23:30
No data collected on the following dates/times, due to a data gap.
11/25 0:30, 5:00, 8:00

Inlet:
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 11/6 19:30 to 
11/16 12:00, and 11/18 2:00 to 11/30 23:30 due to a suspected DO membrane 
puncture or tear and probe malfunction; and a high DO charge on retrieval. 
No data from 11/16 12:30 to 11/17 12:00 due to downtime for calibration, 
maintenance and downloading. 

December, 2000 Sampling Period
Head of Tide:
The following were shallow negative depth data where there is suspect that sonde 
was out of the water, possibly due to ice in the holding tube from very cold and 
negative temperatures; from low specific conductivity and salinity data and high 
turbidity observations.  All data were suspect and deleted.
12/2 22:00-23:30
12/3 0:00-10:00
12/4 4:30-9:00, 22:00-23:30
12/5 0:00-9:30, 17:30-23:30
12/6 0:00, 1:00, 4:30-11:30, 16:00-23:30
12/7 0:00 - 12:30, 16:00-23:30
12/8 0:00-6:30, 8:00, 10:00-23:30
12/9 0:00-3:00
The following were shallow positive depth data where there is suspect that sonde 
was out of the water, possibly due to ice in the holding tube from very cold and 
negative temperatures; from low specific conductivity and salinity data and high 
turbidity observations.  All data were suspect and deleted.
12/1 0:00-13:30, 15:30-23:30
12/2 0:00-21:30
12/3 10:30-23:30
12/4 0:00-4:00
12/4 9:30-21:30
12/5 10:00-17:00
12/6 0:30, 1:30-4:00
12/6 12:00-15:30
12/7 13:00-15:30
12/8	9:30
No data from 12/9 3:30 to 12/31 23:30. This datalogger was pulled for the year 
(winter months) to prevent ice damage.

Inlet:
There is missing dissolved oxygen and percent saturation data from 12/1 0:00 
through 12/31 23:30 due to a suspected DO membrane puncture or tear and probe 
malfunction; and a high DO charge on retrieval (a continuation from the 11/18 
2:00 probe crash. 
There are no missing data due to downtime for calibration, maintenance and 
downloading.




12.  Other Remarks/Notes:

IMPORTANT CHANGES TO NOTE AT THE INLET SITE (IN); where our telemetry unit is 
stationed: A new vented level YSI 6600 with its new vented level cable was 
deployed to collect its first data on 5/4/99 at 12:00.  The YSI telemetry unit 
began collecting its first data on 3/16/98 at 10:30:00 (see Section 4-Research 
Methods).  

At the Inlet site (IN): No data collected from 4/6 12:30 through 4/13 17:30 due 
to a telemetry unit crash; caused by a major leak through the vented-level cable 
causing data sonde corrosion at the cable/sonde interface.  From 4/13 18:00 
through 5/30 9:30 a non-vented level YSI 6000 was used in its place, as both 
the vented-level cable and YSI 6600 were sent back to YSI for repairs.

Note:  The Wells NERR two Drakes Island sites (see 1996-1997 metatdata) are 
currently being monitored (since 1996), but we are using the data for another 
project (CICEET-Wells Harbor dredge; see Section 7-Associated Researchers and 
Projects); and are not collecting the dissolved oxygen, percent saturation, and 
pH parameters.

The use of the newest (Version 2.0) National Estuarine Research Reserve (NERR) 
System-Wide Monitoring Program (SWMP) YSI 6-Series Multi-Parameter Water Quality 
Monitor Standard Operating Procedures began in July ¹99 when they became 
available.

With our extra data sonde, we have been reducing the amount of time of missing 
data from calibrations and maintenance for all sites.  Some months have no 
missing data from the use of this extra sonde.

Any time a reference is made to turbidity data being negative and/or zero, it 
was recorded as a negative in the raw data file and a zero in the edited data 
file due to the formatting of Excel. The technician edited none of these data 
points by hand nor did he/she delete any of them.

Any time a reference is made to turbidity data being negative and/or zero, it 
was recorded as a negative in the raw data file and a zero in the edited data 
file due to the formatting of Excel. The technician edited none of these data 
points by hand nor did he/she delete any of them. 

The Head of Tide site experienced some astronomical high and low tides in the 
beginning of July, which caused fluctuations in the data. Once the tides resumed 
normality, salinity, pH, and dissolved oxygen data resumed to its natural state, 
as low salinity is normal for this freshwater site.  


























