Waquoit Bay (WQB) National Estuarine Research Reserve, Waquoit, MA
   (August 1998-December 1998)
Latest Update: August 1, 2002
                                  
   I. Data set and Research Descriptors
   1. Principal investigator and contact person
   Richard E. Crawford, Ph.D.
   Research Coordinator
   PO Box 3092  
   Waquoit, MA 02536
   508-457-0495 extension 105
   wbnerr@capecod.net
   
   2. Entry verification:
   The data are uploaded in three file formats (each to separate files 
identified with the same file name but with unique extensions) from the YSI 6000 
data logger to a PC with the YSI 6000 data transfer software (Kermit).  Two of 
these (PC6000 and ASCII text formats) are kept on file in the WBNERR archive.  
The comma delimited format data file is imported to the EXCEL spreadsheet 
program (version 5.0) where it is processed according to standard NERRS CDMO 
protocol using the CDMO Excel 5.0 macros.  File size of one complete month of 
data each has been achieved by concatenating (and truncating if necessary) 
shorter files of interrupted data segments.  File contents are examined for 
anomalies (e.g., sensor malfunction, battery failure, spurious values, etc.) by 
visualization of data with the program GRAPHER (ver. 1.3).  Data requiring 
editing are noted and copies of the graphs of raw data are saved at WBNERR.  
Data editing to CDMO protocol is conducted in EXCEL.  Missing data (data logger 
malfunction or maintenance periods) are represented by periods (".").  Outliers 
(data values not within the design range of the respective sensors except for 
turbidity and depth) are changed to periods.  Data values recorded during 
deployment or retrieval (i.e., when the instrument was out of the water or in 
the laboratory) are also changed to periods.  A record of changes is documented 
in the Data Anomalies section of the metadata file. The monthly files are sent 
electronically by FTP to CDMO.  Copies of all files are retained at the reserve. 
The Research Coordinator, Rick Crawford, performs all data  management.  

   3. Research Objectives:
   The primary issue of concern for the Waquoit Bay ecosystem is the influence 
of anthropogenic induced alterations by nitrogen enrichment.  Waquoit Bay 
receives nitrogen from several sources, such as septic systems (their leachate 
percolates into groundwater which then enters the bay),  run off from roads, run 
off containing domestic and agricultural fertilizer and animal waste, and  
atmospheric sources.  This elevated nitrogen loading to the bay has resulted in 
eutrophic conditions that have contributed to alterations of habitats in the 
bay.  For example, thick mats of seaweeds now cover the bottom where eelgrass 
meadows thrived in the 1970's.  Unfortunately, there are few definitive records 
of bay conditions during that period, which makes it difficult to evaluate the 
rates of change.  To facilitate future evaluation, long-term records from data 
loggers are being compiled to track several parameters that describe conditions 
in this eutrophic system.  Of particular interest are measurements of dissolved 
oxygen and turbidity.  These long-term records will facilitate evaluation of 
changes which may come about from a continuation of watershed alteration that 
result from "traditional" development (i.e., non-sewered residential areas 
served by private septic systems typically consisting of septic tanks and leach 
fields) as well as non-industrial commercial development, such as golf courses, 
cranberry bogs, and "mini shopping malls".  The records will be useful for 
evaluating the efficacy of remediation efforts intended to reduce the nitrogen 
loading from these sources to Waquoit Bay.
   
   One site, in central Waquoit Bay and considered the "baseline" location, was 
at latitude 41o 33.927' N, longitude 70 o 31.267' W. A logger was operated at 
this location throughout the August -December 1998 reporting period. 
(Instruments were not operated prior to this due to personnel shortages.) Logger 
sensors were 0.75 m above the bottom to ensure they were above the dense 
macroalgal mat that covers broad expanses of the bottom of Waquoit Bay. The site 
has depths that typically range between 1.8 m to 2.5 m during a tide. The 
original sampling design of the monitoring program deemed that data from this 
unit were to be considered as representative of ambient environmental conditions 
within the bay at the time of a sample. Although the site is well flushed by 
tidal currents, exposed to all points of the wind (i.e., only minimally 
influenced by shoreline features), and is adequately removed from the navigation 
channel to be minimally affected by boating activities, staff at WBNERR were 
concerned about possible effects of residual lateral mixing. This is a typical 
characteristic of well-mixed estuaries whereby water quality varies very little 
with depth but varies considerably across the water body (e.g., laterally) due 
to the more-or-less regular track of water currents. The central basin data 
logger was originally sited without consideration of the horizontal circulation 
pattern in the bay. Research was conducted in 1998 to elucidate this pattern and 
consider its possible influence on data logger output. Part of this work 
involved placing an additional logger elsewhere in the bay. A summary of the 
findings of this work is at the end of Section 5.  Specific details on ancillary 
placements can be found in Section 5.
   
   4. Research methods
   The data logger in the central portion of the bay is considered to provide 
baseline measurements of "ambient" conditions. It records measurements of 
temperature, specific conductivity, salinity, dissolved oxygen, turbidity, water 
level, and pH at 15 minute intervals during deployment periods of roughly two 
weeks. The sampling season is generally from March to December. However, this is 
dependent on weather, the amount of ice on the bay, the operational availability 
of the boat that serves as tender for the loggers, and whether there is 
sufficient staff on hand to satisfactorily operate, calibrate, and maintain the 
equipment. 
   Data logger deployment is achieved with a mooring set up that consists of 75 
pound anchor (cinder blocks) to which two lines are attached. One line is for a 
surface float that marks the location. The other is shorter and terminates at a 
smaller float; line length is such that the float remains submerged throughout 
tidal changes. The data logger is attached to this line in a vertical manner so 
that the sensors (pointing downward) are suspended 75 cm from the bottom. This 
system was chosen because local regulations prohibit installation of a more 
permanent structure (e.g., a piling) and to minimize opportunities for 
vandalism.  Unfortunately, because the boat used to tend the data logger(s) is 
small, handling the weight of the mooring can exceed the limits of safety for 
data logger deployment/retrieval operations on windy days. As such, data logger 
field operations are limited to "fair weather".  This contingency may result in 
interruptions in data collection that exceed those required for routine 
maintenance and calibration schedules.     
   During colder months, continuous operations are limited to about two weeks 
due to limited battery life. In the warmer months, particularly June - 
September, biofouling of the sensors also limits continuous operation to about 
two weeks even though battery performance during this period would allow longer 
deployments.  
   
   After a deployment, each logger is brought back to the laboratory for post 
calibration check, data downloading, instrument and sensor cleaning, and 
calibration. These procedures are carried out according to the methods described 
in the YSI Operating Manual.  Salinity sensors were calibrated with reference 
seawater that had been previously analyzed with a Guildline salinometer at the 
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Oxygen calibration was performed with the 
aid of a laboratory grade barometer. pH sensors were calibrated with 7.0 and 
10.0 pH standard solutions (2-point calibrations). Turbidity standard solutions 
were prepared from formazin dilutions that were checked with a LaMotte Model 600 
turbidity meter (calibrated with a 2-point calibration using LaMotte turbidity 
standards).  Temperature sensors were not calibrated.
   
   Oxygen sensor membranes were inspected after each deployment. Performance was 
also evaluated during the post-retrieval check in the laboratory test tank prior 
to post-calibration. If sensor performance had deteriorated and was not 
satisfactory, the membrane was replaced. If performance was satisfactory, the 
membrane was carefully cleaned with a gentle water spray (a Water Pick dental 
instrument), the sensor was recalibrated and then the unit was redeployed. 
During colder months, when biofouling is less of a concern, membranes were often 
re-used for two deployments.  If a membrane was replaced, calibration was not 
done until the membrane had been in place for at least 24 hours.  Final 
calibration was done immediately prior to instrument deployment.   
   5.      Site location and character:
   The Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve (WBNERR) is located in 
the northeastern United States on the southern shore of Cape Cod, Massachusetts.  
About 8,000 people maintain permanent residency in Waquoit Bay's drainage area, 
which covers parts of the towns of Falmouth, Mashpee, and Sandwich.  During 
summer months, the population swells 2-3 fold.
   
   WBNERR is representative of shallow coastal lagoons that occur from Cape Cod 
to Sandy Hook, New Jersey. WBNERR is within the Virginian biogeographic 
province, on the transitional border (Cape Cod) between the Virginian and the 
more northern Acadian biogeographic province.
   
   Like many embayments located on glacial outwash plains, Waquoit Bay is 
shallow, fronted by prominent barrier beaches (i.e., those of South Cape Beach 
State Park and Washburn Island), and is backed by salt marshes and upland 
forests.  Two narrow, navigable inlets, reinforced with granite jetties, have 
been constructed through two barrier beaches to connect Waquoit Bay with 
Nantucket Sound to the south.  A third shallow and generally unnavigable inlet 
opened through the Washburn Island barrier beach during Hurricane Bob in August 
1991. It has not been reinforced and its fate remains uncertain. 
   
   The eastern shore of uninhabited Washburn Island, with its low, steep bluffs 
and forested uplands, forms the western boundary of the reserve.  However, tidal 
waters enter and leave the bay proper (and the Reserve) via the so-called Seapit 
and Eel rivers, which funnel tidal flows along the western shore of Washburn 
Island, through Eel Pond and ultimately to Nantucket Sound. 
   
   Dense housing developments cover the two peninsulas that form the western 
shore of the two rivers.  Although the developments are outside of the Reserve 
boundaries, nitrogen in discharges from their septic systems (which flows 
ultimately into the bay via groundwater) and in fertilizer run-off from their 
lawns has significant effects on the functioning of the Waquoit Bay ecosystem 
complex. The impacts of these effects have been a subject of study at the 
Reserve since its designation (1988). An outcome of this research has been the 
delineation of subwatersheds within the overall drainage area for Waquoit Bay, 
of which WBNERR is a small part. This knowledge allows robust experimental 
designs (e.g., substitution of space for time) which augment results from work 
done within and near to the Reserve.   
   
   At the northern end of the Bay, an area comprising a separate subwatershed, 
coastal bluffs of glacial till rise 30 feet above sea level, the highest land 
within the Reserve.  Adjacent to the bluffs, the northern basin of the bay is 
its deepest area (2.3 m mean low water), albeit much of the remainder of the bay 
is only slightly shallower (roughly 1.6 m).  The NB data logger is located 
within this basin. Bourne, Bog, and Caleb ponds are freshwater kettle hole ponds 
on the northern-most shore of the bay.  As components of the same sub-watershed, 
they have a common albeit minor freshwater outflow into the bay's northern basin 
via a narrow channel through a brackish marsh.  Although this flow is small, 
over the centuries it has created a significant delta of coarse sand that 
overlies much finer sediments found at comparable offshore distances elsewhere. 
The source of this sand is the sandy beach through which this fresh water 
discharge must travel.
   
   To the east and south, land in other subwatersheds surrounds several salt and 
freshwater ponds, including Hamblin and Jehu Ponds, brackish salt ponds that are 
connected to the Bay by the tidal waters of Little and Great rivers, 
respectively.  The shorelines of the ponds are developed with residences that 
are occupied both seasonally and year round. Hamblin Pond and Little River are 
components of one subwatershed, and Jehu Pond and Great River are elements of a 
separate subwatershed. Further south lies Sage Lot Pond. It is in the least 
developed subwatershed which also contains the barrier beach and salt marsh 
ecosystem of the reserve's South Cape Beach State Park. To the east of Sage Lot 
Pond and within the same subwatershed, lies the highly brackish Flat Pond. It 
receives minimal tidal flows of salt water from Sage Lot Pond through a narrow, 
excavated channel. The preponderance of the input to Flat Pond is groundwater 
and run off, both of which are likely affected (e.g., nutrients, pesticides, 
bacteria) by an adjacent golf course and near-by upper-scale residential 
development.
   
   The largest source of freshwater to Waquoit Bay is the Quashnet/Moonakis 
River.  (Although named "river", this and the reserve's Childs River are more 
appropriately described as "rivulets".)  A component of yet another 
subwatershed, it originates in Johns Pond situated north of the bay and 
traverses forests, cranberry bogs, residential areas, and the Quashnet Valley 
Golf Course before entering the bay near the southern "boundary" of the northern 
basin. ("Quashnet" applies to that portion of the river within the town of 
Mashpee, and "Moonakis" refers to the brackish estuary at the river's mouth, 
lying in the town of Falmouth. Quashnet will be used hereafter to refer to the 
entire river.)  Although the "baseline " data logger is roughly in the middle of 
the bay, it is also in the course of the discharge plume of the river. The plume 
is only detectable by the CB data logger during high water flows.  The Quashnet 
River is the only component of the Waquoit Bay estuary system that has 
sufficient numbers of coliform bacteria to cause it to be closed to 
shellfishing. The source(s) of this bacteria is unknown. The Quashnet River 
delivers significantly less nitrogen to Waquoit Bay than does the Childs River, 
which lies to the west and originates in Johns Pond.
   
   The Childs River is the second largest input of freshwater to the Bay.  A 
component of another subwatershed, it runs through densely developed residential 
areas. The Childs River subwatershed receives the highest nitrogen loading and 
is the largest nitrogen contributor to the Waquoit Bay system of all the 
subwatersheds.
   
   Another, albeit smaller, source of freshwater is the discharge of Red Brook 
through brackish marshlands into Hamblin Pond.  Additional freshwater enters the 
bay elsewhere through groundwater seepage, precipitation and the flows of small 
brooks.  A significant groundwater flow enters the eastern end of the mooring 
basin at the head of the bay. There is relatively little surface water runoff 
entering directly into the bay due to the high percolation rates of Cape Cod's 
coarse, sandy soils.
   
   A data logger is located in central Waquoit Bay (identified as "Central 
Basin" or CB) at 41o 33.927' N, longitude 70 o 31.267' W.  It is the reference 
site for the WBNERR data logger water quality monitoring program. An instrument 
will be moored at this site for the long term in order to collect baseline 
measurement of "ambient" conditions within Waquoit Bay. This information will be 
considered to represent an integration of the general conditions within the bay.  
The site is well flushed by tides, is 1.8-2.5 m deep, and is in an area that is 
minimally disturbed by routine activities on the bay (e.g. boat traffic, 
shellfishing, etc.). The Central Basin region was once covered by eelgrass 
(Zostera marina).  This plant that has all but disappeared from the bay in the 
last two decades and has been replaced by seaweed, predominantly Cladophora 
vagabunda, Gracilaria tikvahiayae, and Enteromorpha sp.. The CB site is 
southwest of the mouth of the Quashnet River.
   The stream's freshwater discharge into Waquoit Bay is typically 5-10 ft3 /s. 
The resultant discharge plume at these low flows has an undetectable influence 
on salinity at the CB site.  However, unusually high precipitation events or 
occasional releases of impounded water at an upstream cranberry bog can 
significantly increase flow to > 30 ft3 /s.  The stream's discharge plume from 
these events results in slight reductions in salinity at CB.  High precipitation 
is most common in the spring although summer and fall are when rains from 
tropical disturbances may occur.  Discharges from cranberry bogs typically occur 
in the fall (harvest time) and after the coldest periods of winter; they are 
likely to be brief events.   
   
   Knowledge of the degree of mixing at the two sites was originally derived 
from measurements made by reserve staff (at the CB site) and from data obtained 
by the reserve's volunteer water quality monitoring group the Waquoit 
BayWatchers who have collected depth profiles of Waquoit Bay water quality since 
1993. Subsequent research by reserve staff has revealed that lateral mixing has 
considerable influence because tidal currents follow a general course through 
the bay. This results in an overall structure to horizontal patterns of water 
quality characteristics. The pattern it produces is a gyre in the central 
portion of the bay whereby currents follow a circular pattern in an 
anticlockwise direction around a central area that exhibits reduced exchange 
with the remainder of the bay. The flushing rate within the gyre is diminished 
when compared with other areas of the bay. The location of the gyre meanders 
slightly, apparently under the influence of tides and wind. Given that the CB 
location can be either under the influence of the circular current flow or the 
"older" water nearer the center, as the gyre moves up and down the bay, there is 
explainable variability in CB data (e.g., salinity values). The MP site is more 
consistantly near the outer regions of the gyre, that is, more frequently in the 
circular current, and those data are less affected by the meandering of the 
gyre. (Relocating the logger to the central area of the gyre is impractical 
because that area if frequented by boat traffic and the logger mooring would be 
a hazard to navigation.)   

In September and October, 1998, a second data logger was situated roughly 100 
feet to the southwest of the CB logger. This logger was called CB2. It was 
fitted with the standard suite of sensors except the pH sensor was an 
experimental type that was being tested on behalf of engineers at Yellow Springs 
Instruments, Inc., manufacturers of the data logger units. The CB2 unit was also 
fitted with an oxidation reduction potential (ORP) sensor.
   
    In November and December, 1998, a data logger was situated at longitude 41 o 
34.131' N, latitude 70 o 31.294' W, roughly 1200 feet northward of the CB 
logger. It was called MP because it was near Metoxit Point. This logger was 
sited to test this location as an improved alternative to the CB site. The 
objective was to see whether the MP site was influenced by lateral mixing 
features to the extent observed at the CB site. The goal was to find a better 
site for the collection of "baseline" data. (See Section 12.)
   
   In previous years, a data logger was located in the basin at the head of 
Waquoit Bay. This site was not monitored in 1998.
   
   6. Data collection period
   Data collection in the central basin at CB began august 6, 1998 and continued 
until December 23, 1998. Data collection at CB2 (adjacent to the CB logger) 
extended from September 2, 1998 to October 5, 1998. Data collection occurred at 
site MP from November 3, 1998 to December 23, 1998.
   
   7. Associated researchers and projects
   None to report.
   
   8. Variable sequence, range of measurements, units, resolution, and accuracy:
   
   YSI 6000 data logger
      
   Variable Name   Range of Measurements(units)  Resolution          Accuracy
   Date       1-12, 1-31, 00-99 (Mo,Day,Yr) 1 month, 1 day, 1 year   NA
   Time       0-24, 0-60, 0-60   (Hr, Min, Sec)  1 hr, 1 min, 1s          NA
   Temp       -5 to 45                 0.01 C              +/-0.15C 
   SpCOND          0-100 (mS/cm)            0.01mS/cm      +/-0.5% of reading +
                                                 0.001 mS/cm
   Salinity        0-70 Parts per thousand (ppt) 0.01ppt             +/-1.0% of 
reading
                                                 or 0.1 ppt (whichever is 
greater) 
   DO              0-200 (% air Saturation)      0.1% @air saturation     +/-2% 
@air sat. 
   DO              200-500 (% air Saturation)    0.1% @air saturation     +/-6% 
@air sat.
   DO         0-20 (mg/l)              0.01mg/l       +/-0.2mg/l
   DO         20-50 (mg/l)             0.01mg/l       +/-0.6mg/l 
   Depth (shallow) 0-9.1 (m)           0.001m              +/-0.018m 
   pH              2-14 units               0.01units      +/-0.2units
   Turb       0-1000 NTU               0.1NTU              +/-5% of reading
                                                 or 2 NTU (whichever is greater)
   Data columns are separated by tabs.
   
   
   9.     Coded variable code definitions
   The file names are labeled according to site identifier code, month, year 
(e.g., cb0898).  
Identifier codes are: 
   cb = central basin site in Waquoit Bay and is the so-called reference site; 
cb2 = a second 
logger was placed
   about 100' SW of the cb logger to test new equipment for YSI Instruments; mp 
= a site 
about 1200 feet north
   of the cb site, chosen to see if this was a better "reference site" than the 
cb location.
   
   10.     Data anomalies
   
    August 1998: 
         CB:   DO% and mg/L values from 8/20/98 22:45:00 to 8/24/98 11:30:00 
were quite spurious.  Saturation values exceeded 600 % and mg/l values were 
negative. At the time of the post-calibration check the DO% was 17.8 (should 
have been near 100 %) and there was a slight fold in the DO probe membrane.  
This is the most probable cause for the anomaly and these data were deleted from 
the report. Turbidity data from 8/31/98 16:00:00 to 23:45:00 are missing because 
the probe was malfunctioning and was out of service.
DO data was deleted from 8/31/98 16:00 to 09/04/98 23:45.  DO values were >100%
and up to 250% until the time when the unit failed due to water in the battery
compartment.  
   
    September 1998: 
         CB:  DO data was deleted from 8/31/98 16:00 to 09/04/98 23:45.  DO values were >100%
and up to 250% until the time when the unit failed due to water in the battery
compartment.
         CB2:  The data logger was not suspended above the bottom at 0.75 m as 
intended because the line supporting the data logger was too long and the float 
to which it was attached reached the surface at low tide levels. Thus, data 
logger height above the bottom varied and all data that are sensitive to water 
level are corrupted. Fortunately, the site is well mixed vertically and any 
stratification that does occur takes place very near the bottom. Most of the 
measurements are useful and have been retained. The water level data are 
corrupted (particularly during low water level periods) but the data record has 
been retained. Variations within the water level data record suggest that data 
logger mooring line was also entangled with the line attached to the large 
marker buoy. As a result there was inconsistency in the depth reached by the 
data logger during low water periods. Wind blowing against the marker buoy 
probably played a role in this variation.
   
    October 1998: 
         CB2:  None to report
         CB:  Turbidity outliers as follows-
   
             10/16/98
             03:00:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             03:15:00
             0000
             
             
             10/16/98
             03:30:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             03:45:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             04:00:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             04:15:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             04:30:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             04:45:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             05:00:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/16/98
             05:15:00
             0000
             
             
             10/16/98
             05:30:00
             0000
             
             
             10/16/98
             09:45:00
             0000
             
             
             10/17/98
             15:00:00
             0000
             
             
             10/17/98
             15:15:00
             0000
             
             
             10/19/98
             12:00:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/19/98
             12:15:00
             -0001
             
             
             10/22/98
             00:00:00
             0000
             
             
             10/24/98
             12:00:00
             0000
             
             
             10/26/98
             16:30:00
             0000
             
             
    November 1998: 
         CB:  None to report.
         MP: During post-calibration of the November deployment (post-cal done 
12/04/98), DO % values were slowly increasing rather than slowly decreasing as 
expected. Inspection of the oxygen sensor membrane revealed a slight fold. 
Oxygen data for the month (11/03/98 to 11/30/98) are suspect, although they are 
within the range of expected values.
    
    December 1998: 
         CB:  Post-deployment check delayed until 1/26/98.  When checking the 
turbidity sensor, the turbidity standard of 0 NTU read 6.9 NTU.  All other 
parameters were within range. The turbidity data do not reflect a significant 
drift as suggested by the post-calibration results. Post-cal numbers were 
considered anomalous and were ignored.
         MP:  As noted (above), during post-calibration of the November 
deployment (post-cal done 12/04/98), DO% values were slowly increasing rather 
than slowly decreasing as expected.  Inspection of the oxygen sensor membrane 
revealed a slight fold. Data for 12/01/98 and 12/02/98 are suspect although they 
are within the range of expected values.
   
   11.     Missing data
    The instruments were not operational at WBNERR until August 6, 1998.  The 
following data are missing:
   
    August 1998:
         CB:  No data until 08/06/98 16:00:00 when logger was placed in service.
         CB:  Oxygen data (DO% and mg/l) deleted from 08/20/98 22:45:00 to 
08/24/98 11:30:00 (when unit was shut down for servicing) because the values 
impossibly incoorect. There was a problem with the sensor's membrane. 
         CB: No data from 08/24/98 11:45:00 to 08/31/98 15:45:00 when logger was 
out of service for recalibration.  No other data loggers were in service during 
August.
	CB: DO data was deleted from 8/31/98 16:00 to 09/04/98 23:45.  DO values were >100%
and up to 250% until the time when the unit failed due to water in the battery
compartment.
   
    September 1998:
         CB2 data logger deployment commenced this month.
	 CB: DO data was deleted from 8/31/98 16:00 to 09/04/98 23:45.  DO values were >100%
and up to 250% until the time when the unit failed due to water in the battery
compartment.      
	 CB:  No data from 09/05/98 00:00:00 through 09/15/98 18:00:00.  Sonde 
(SN#95A27701) was retrieved 09/15/98.  Battery compartment was filled with 
water. Sonde had ceased recording on 09/05/98 at 00:00:00.  Replaced with sonde 
SN#96B46179 which was deployed on 9/18/98 at 18:00:00.
         CB:  No turbidity data recorded for 09/01/98-09/15/98 18:00:00. 
Turbidity probe out of service.
         CB2:  No data from 09/01/98 00:00:00 through 09/02/98 14:45:00. Logger 
not in service.
         CB2:  No data from 09/15/98 10:30:00 through 09/18/98 16:45:00 for 
servicing.
         CB2:  No turbidity data recorded for 09/01/98-09/18/98 16:45:00. 
Turbidity probe out of service. 
         CB2: No data from 09/30/98 23:00:00-23:45:00; datalogger set to record 
in DST instead of EST.  When corrected to EST, last hour was lost. 	
   
    October 1998:
         CB:  No data from 10/05/98 15:15:00 through 10/13/98 17:45:00 for 
servicing
         CB:  No data from 10/28/98 11:00:00 through 10/31/98 23:45:00 for 
servicing
         CB2:  No data from 10/05/98 14:15:00 through 10/31/98 23:45:00 for 
servicing.
         CB2:  No turbidity data recorded for 10/01/98 to 10/31/98 23:45:00. 
Turbidity probe out of service. 
         CB2 deployment ceased at the end of October.
   
    November 1998: 
         MP data logger deployment commenced this month.
         CB:  No data from 11/01/98 00:00:00 through 11/03/98 17:45:00 for 
servicing.
         CB:  No data from 11/28/98 06:00:00 through 11/30/98 23:45:00 due to 
battery failure.
         MP: No data from 11/01/98 00:00:00-11/03/98 19:45:00 for servicing
   
    December 1998:
         CB:  No data from 12/01/98 00:00:00 through 12/07/98 16:45:00 for 
servicing.
         CB:  No data recorded for 12/11/98 10:00:00. Apparent data sonde 
malfuncton.
         CB:  No data recorded for 12/17/98 21:45:00. Apparent data sonde 
malfunction.
         CB:  Both loggers were pulled for the winter on 12/23/98 at 11:15:00.  
Logging ceased and no data were recorded from 12/23/98 11:30:00 to 12/31/98 
23:45:00.
         MP: No data from 12/02/98 11:00:00-12/07/98 16:45:00 for servicing; 
datalogger pulled for winter 12/23/98 11:30:00
   
   12.     Other remarks/notes
   Review of data from the CB and MP loggers suggested that moving the 
"reference" site northward would benefit the monitoring program. The CB site 
(latitude 41 o 33.927' N, longitude 70 o 31.267' W) is too close to the southern 
boundary of the gyre that exists in the central part of the bay. As such, when 
the gyre meanders northward, the logger becomes exposed to water more 
characteristic of Nantucket Sound conditions rather than the water that has 
estuarine conditions (gyre water). Moving the reference site northward to MP (41 
o 34.131' N, longitude; 70 o 31.294' W latitude) would locate the logger in 
estuarine water. Since this water more directly reveals influences by 
anthropogenic influences (e.g., elevated chlorophyll concentrations, as revealed 
by research at WBNERR), the MP site would provide data more apropos to the goals 
of the NERRS System-Wide Monitoring Program.  Future "baseline or reference" 
deployments will be at the MP site. 


