Waquoit Bay(WQB) NERR Water Quality Metadata
(September -December 1999) 
Latest Update: October 5, 2000 
                                
I. Data set and Research Descriptors 
1. Principal investigator  
Chris Weidman, Ph.D. 
Research Coordinator 
PO Box 3092   
Waquoit, MA 02536 
508-457-0495 extension 105 
wbnerr@capecod.net 
Contact Person 
David Giehtbrock, Research Assistant 
PO Box 3092   
Waquoit, MA 02536 
508-457-0495 extension 109 
wbnerr@capecod.net 
    
2. Entry verification: 
     The data are uploaded in three file formats (each to separate files 
identified with the same file name but with unique extensions) from the YSI 6000 
data logger to a PC with the YSI 6000 data transfer software (Kermit).  Two of 
these (PC6000 and ASCII text formats) are kept on file in the Waquoit Bay 
National Estuarine Research Reserve  archive.  The comma delimited format data 
file is imported to the EXCEL spreadsheet program (version 5.0) where it is 
processed according to standard National Estuarine Research Reserve Central Data 
Management Office protocol using the CDMO Excel 5.0 macros.  Each file contains 
one complete month of data. This standard size has been achieved by 
concatenating (and truncating if necessary) shorter files of interrupted data 
segments.  File contents are examined for anomalies (e.g., sensor malfunction, 
battery failure, spurious values, etc.) by visualization of data with the 
Ecowatch Software provided by YSI.  Data requiring editing are noted and copies 
of the graphs of raw data are saved at WBNERR.  Data editing to CDMO protocol is 
conducted in EXCEL.  Missing data (data logger malfunction or maintenance 
periods) are represented by periods ".". Outliers (data values not within the 
design range of the respective sensors except for turbidity and depth) are 
changed to periods.  Data values recorded during deployment or retrieval (i.e., 
when the instrument was out of the water or in the laboratory) are also changed 
to periods.  A record of changes is documented in the Data Anomalies section of 
the metadata file. The monthly files are sent electronically by FTP to CDMO.  
Copies of all files are retained at the reserve. The Research Assistant, David 
Giehtbrock, performs all data management

3. Research Objectives: 
     The primary issue of concern for the Waquoit Bay ecosystem is the influence 
of  anthropogenic induced alterations by nitrogen enrichment.  Waquoit Bay 
receives nitrogen from several sources, including septic systems from which 
leachate percolates into groundwater, which eventually enters the bay, 
atmospheric sources, runoff containing domestic and agricultural fertilizer and 
animal waste, and runoff from roads. This elevated nitrogen loading to the bay 
has resulted in eutrophic conditions that have contributed to alterations of 
habitats in the bay.  For example, thick mats of seaweeds now cover the bottom 
where eelgrass meadows thrived in the 1970's.  Unfortunately, there are few 
definitive records of bay conditions during past decades, which makes it 
difficult to evaluate the rates of change.  To facilitate future evaluation, 
long-term records from data loggers are being compiled to track several 
parameters that describe conditions in this eutrophic system.  Of particular 
interest are measurements of dissolved oxygen and turbidity.  These long-term 
records will facilitate evaluation of changes in the ecosystem, which may come 
about in response to continued development in the watershed.  At present,  
residential areas are still served by private septic systems typically 
consisting of septic tanks and leach fields and there is ongoing  non-industrial 
commercial development, including construction of golf courses, cranberry bogs, 
and retail shopping outlets.  The long term records will be useful for 
evaluating the efficacy of remediation efforts intended to reduce the nitrogen 
loading from these sources to Waquoit Bay. 

4. Research methods: 
     The previous Research Coordinator determined that Metoxit Point would 
provide a representative sample site of the bay based on data from the WBNERR 
BayWatcher Volunteers and data loggers (See Metadata 1998 for Waquoit Bay).  
This new site represents a change in location for the base line site in 1999.  
This site has the coordinates, 41o 34.131' N, 070o 31.294' W.  The site was 
given the designation of MP.  An instrument was operated at this site starting 
in September and ran through December 1999.  No data were collected at the 
Reserve prior to September due to lack of personnel.
      Logger sensors were 0.75 m above the bottom to ensure they were above the 
dense macro algal mat that covers the bottom of Waquoit Bay. The data logger 
records measurements of temperature, specific conductivity, salinity, dissolved 
oxygen, turbidity, water level, and pH at 30 minute intervals during deployment 
periods of  roughly two weeks. The sampling season is generally from March to 
December. However, this is dependent on weather conditions and the operational 
availability of the boat that serves as tender for the loggers.  
     Data logger deployment is achieved with a mooring set up that consists of  
75 pound anchor to which two lines are attached. One line is for a surface float 
that marks the location. The other is shorter and terminates at a smaller float; 
line length is such that the float remains submerged throughout tidal changes. 
The data logger is attached to this line in a vertical position so that the 
sensors (pointing downward) are suspended 75 cm from the bottom. This system was 
chosen because local regulations prohibit installation of a more permanent 
structure (e.g., a piling) and to minimize opportunities for vandalism. 
     During colder months, continuous operations are limited to about two weeks 
due to limited battery life. In the warmer months, particularly June - 
September, biofouling of the sensors also limits continuous operation to about 
two weeks even though battery performance during this period would allow longer 
deployments.   
     After a deployment, each logger is brought back to the laboratory for a 
post calibration check, data downloading, instrument and sensor cleaning, and 
calibration. These procedures are carried out according to the methods described 
in the YSI Operating Manual.  Salinity sensors were calibrated with reference 
seawater that had been previously analyzed with a Guildline salinometer at the 
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.  A 2 point calibration was accomplished 
using pH buffers 7.0 and 10. The turbidity standard solutions were prepared from 
formazin dilutions to 100 NTU. Temperature sensors were not calibrated.  Oxygen 
sensor membranes were inspected before and after each deployment.  Oxygen sensor 
membranes were replaced after each deployment per recommendation by YSI 
personnel.  Performance was also evaluated during the post-retrieval check in 
the laboratory test tank prior to post-calibration.  After a membrane was 
replaced, calibration was not done until the membrane had been in place for at 
least 24 hours.  Final calibration was done immediately prior to instrument 
deployment.

5. Site location and character: 
     The Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve (WBNERR) is located in 
the northeastern United States on the southern shore of Cape Cod, Massachusetts.  
About 8,000 people maintain permanent residency in Waquoit Bay's drainage area, 
which covers parts of the towns of Falmouth, Mashpee, and Sandwich.  During 
summer months, the population swells 200 to 300%. 
     WBNERR is representative of shallow coastal lagoons that occur from Cape 
Cod to Sandy Hook, New Jersey. WBNERR is within the Virginian biogeographic 
province, on the transitional border (Cape Cod) between the Virginian and the 
more northern Acadian biogeographic province. 
     Like many embayments located on glacial outwash plains, Waquoit Bay is 
shallow, fronted by prominent barrier beaches (i.e., those of South Cape Beach 
State Park and Washburn Island), and is backed by salt marshes and upland 
forests giving the Bay a salinity range of 0 - 30 ppt.  Two narrow, navigable 
inlets, reinforced with granite jetties, have been constructed through two 
barrier beaches to connect Waquoit Bay with Vineyard Sound to the south.  A 
third shallow and generally unnavigable inlet opened through the Washburn Island 
barrier beach during Hurricane Bob in August 1991. It has not been reinforced 
and its fate remains uncertain.       The western shore of uninhabited Washburn 
Island, with its low, steep bluffs and forested uplands, forms the western 
boundary of the reserve.  Tidal waters enter and leave the bay proper (and the 
Reserve) via the Seapit and Eel rivers, which funnel tidal flows along the 
western shore of  Washburn Island, through Eel Pond and out to Vineyard Sound.  
     Dense housing developments cover the two peninsulas that form the western 
shore of the two rivers.  Although the developments are outside of the Reserve 
boundaries, nitrogen in discharges from their septic systems (which flows 
ultimately into the bay via groundwater) and in fertilizer run-off from their 
lawns has significant effects on the functioning of the Waquoit Bay ecosystem. 
The impacts of these effects have been a subject of study at the Reserve since 
its designation in 1988. The subwatersheds are developed to different degrees, 
some are totally built out with residential housing, some moderately developed, 
and some are still pristine with no development.  This configuration allows 
robust experimental designs (e.g., substitution of space for time) which augment 
results from work done within and near to the Reserve. 
     At the northern end of the bay, coastal bluffs of glacial till rise 30 feet 
above sea level, marking the highest elevation within the Reserve.  The northern 
basin of the bay is its deepest area, 2.3 m mean low water, albeit much of the 
remainder of the bay is only slightly shallower, averaging roughly 1.6 m. 
Bourne, Bog, and Caleb ponds are freshwater kettle hole ponds on the northern 
most shore of the bay.  As components of the same sub-watershed, they have a 
common albeit minor freshwater outflow into the bay's northern basin via a 
narrow channel through a brackish marsh.  Although this flow is small, over the 
centuries it has created a significant delta of coarse sand that overlies much 
finer sediments found at comparable offshore distances elsewhere. The source of 
this sand is the sandy beach through which this fresh water discharge must 
travel. 
     To the east and south, land in other subwatersheds surrounds several salt 
and freshwater ponds, including Hamblin and Jehu Ponds, brackish salt ponds that 
are connected to the bay by the tidal waters of Little and Great rivers, 
respectively.  The shorelines of the ponds are developed with residences that 
are occupied both seasonally and year round. Hamblin Pond and Little River are 
components of one subwatershed, and Jehu Pond and Great River are elements of a 
separate subwatershed. Further south lies Sage Lot Pond. It is in the least 
developed subwatershed which also contains the barrier beach and salt marsh 
ecosystem of the reserve's South Cape Beach State Park. To the east of Sage Lot 
Pond and within the same subwatershed, lies the highly brackish Flat Pond. It 
receives minimal tidal flows of salt water from Sage Lot Pond through a narrow, 
excavated channel. Most of the water flowing in to Flat Pond is groundwater and 
run off, both of which maybe affected (e.g., nutrients, pesticides, bacteria) by 
an adjacent golf course and near-by upper-scale residential development.      
The largest source of freshwater to Waquoit Bay is the Quashnet/Moonakis River.   
Although named "river", this and the reserve's Childs River might be more 
appropriately described as "rivulets".  A component of yet another subwatershed, 
it originates in Johns Pond situated five miles north of the bay and traverses 
forests, cranberry bogs, residential areas, and the Quashnet Valley Golf Course 
before entering the bay near the southern part of the northern basin.  The river 
is called the Quashnet where it flows within the town of Mashpee, and the 
Moonakis as it enteres the brackish estuary at the river's mouth, in the town of 
Falmouth.  Quashnet will be used hereafter to refer to the entire river.   
     The Quashnet River is the only component of the Waquoit Bay estuary system 
that has sufficient numbers of coliform bacteria to cause it to be closed, at 
times, to shell fishing. The source(s) of this bacteria is unknown. The Quashnet 
River delivers significantly less nitrogen to Waquoit Bay than does the Childs 
River, which lies to the west and also originates in Johns Pond. 
     The Childs River is the second largest input of freshwater to the bay.  A 
component of  another subwatershed, it runs through densely developed 
residential areas. The Childs River subwatershed receives the highest nitrogen 
loading and is the largest nitrogen contributor of all the subwatersheds in the 
Waquoit Bay system. 
     Another, albeit smaller, source of freshwater is the discharge of Red Brook 
through brackish marshlands into Hamblin Pond.  Additional freshwater enters the 
bay elsewhere through groundwater seepage, precipitation and the flows of small 
brooks.  A significant groundwater flow enters the eastern end of the mooring 
basin at the head of the bay. There is relatively little surface water runoff 
entering directly into the bay due to the high percolation rates of Cape Cod's 
coarse, sandy soils. 
     A data logger is located in Waquoit Bay near the southern tip of a 
peninsula of land bordering the western mouth of the Quashnet River at 41o  
34.131' N, 070o  31.294' W and is identified as "Metoxit Point" or MP. This site 
is influenced by the freshwater discharge from the Quashnet River. The Quashnet 
River watershed runs the gamut of highly developed to pristine forest. This site 
is also situated within a natural gyre that circulates water in the middle of 
the bay. Salinity ranges from 27.3 ppt to 31.9 ppt.  Tidal Range: Spring Mean 
(m) 0.57 Neap Mean (m) 0.33.  The latitude is 41o34.131' N and the longitude is 
070o 31.294' W. It is the new reference site for the WBNERR data logger water 
quality monitoring program in 1999. An instrument will be moored at this site 
for the long term, in order to collect baseline measurement of "ambient" 
conditions within Waquoit Bay. This information will be considered to represent 
the general conditions within the bay.  The site is well flushed by tides, is 
1.8-2.5 m deep, and is in an area that is minimally disturbed by routine 
activities on the bay (e.g. boat traffic, shell fishing, etc.).
     Knowledge of the degree of mixing in Waquoit Bay was originally derived 
from  measurements made by reserve staff and from data obtained by the reserve's 
volunteer water quality monitoring group, the Waquoit BayWatchers, who have 
collected depth profiles of Waquoit Bay water quality since 1993. Subsequent 
research by reserve staff has revealed that lateral mixing has considerable 
influence because tidal currents follow a general course through the bay. This 
results in an overall structure to horizontal patterns of water quality 
characteristics. The pattern it produces is a gyre in the central portion of the 
bay whereby currents follow a circular pattern in an anticlockwise direction 
around a central area that exhibits reduced exchange with the remainder of the 
bay. The flushing rate within the gyre is diminished when compared with other 
areas of the bay. The location of the gyre meanders slightly, apparently under 
the influence of tides and wind.  The MP site is more consistently near the 
outer regions of the gyre, that is, more frequently in the circular current, and 
those data are less affected by the meandering of the gyre. (Relocating the 
logger to the central area of the gyre is impractical because that area if 
frequented by boat traffic and the logger mooring would be a hazard to 
navigation.)    
 
6. Data collection period 
Data collection occurred at site Metoxit Point (MP) from September 20, 1999 
15:00:00 to December 20, 1999 10:30:00. 
    
7. Associated researchers and projects 
None to report. 
 
8. Variable sequence, range of measurements, units, resolution, and accuracy: 
 
YSI 6000 data logger 
 
Variable Name   Range of Measurements (units)   Resolution           Accuracy 
Date            1-12, 1-31, 00-99 (Mo,Day,Yr)   1 month, 1 day, 1 year   NA 
Time            0-24, 0-60, 0-60 (Hr, Min, Sec) 1 hr, 1 min, 1s          NA 
Temp           -5 to 45 (C)                     0.01 C                +/-0.15C 
SpCOND          0-100 (mS/cm)                   0.01mS/cm    +/-0.5% of reading+ 
                                                                 0.001 mS/cm 
Salinity        0-70 Parts per thousand (ppt)   0.01ppt      +/-1.0% of reading 
                                               or 0.1 ppt (whichever is greater) 
DO              0-200 (% air Saturation)        0.1% @air sat.  +/-2% @air sat.  
DO              200-500 (% air Saturation)  0.1% @air saturation +/-6% @air sat. 
DO              0-20 (mg/l)                     0.01mg/l         +/-0.2mg/l 
DO              20-50 (mg/l)                    0.01mg/l         +/-0.6mg/l 
Depth (shallow) 0-9.1 (m)                       0.001m           +/-0.018m 
pH              2-14 units                      0.01units        +/-0.2units 
Turb            0-1000 NTU                      0.1NTU         +/-5% of reading 
                                                 or 2 NTU (whichever is greater) 
 
9. Coded variable code definitions 
     The file names are labeled according to site identifier code, month, year 
(e.g., mp0999).   
Identifier codes are; Metoxit Point, Waquoit Bay, mp = a site about 1200 feet 
north of the cb site 
(see Metadata Waqoit Bay 1998). Mp was the only site where a data logger was 
operated during 1999.  
 
10. Data anomalies 
  
October 1999 

Metoxit Point 
The following were small negative turbidity values, possibly due to a small 
calibration error. These data were not deleted.    
     10/6 15:30, 16:00, 18:30, 19:30, 21:00-23:30 
     10/7 0:00-9:00, 16:30-18:00, 23:30 
     10/8 0:30, 1:30, 2:30, 3:00, 5:00, 5:30, 22:30, 23:00, 23:30 
     10/9 0:00-14:00 
     10/10 10:00-11:30, 23:00, 23:30 
     10/11 0:00-4:30, 7:00, 18:00, 20:30, 21:00, 22:30 
     10/12 2:30-4:00, 5:00, 6:30 
     10/13 1:00-8:30, 9:30-10:30 
     10/14 21:30:00 
     10/16 5:00-5:30, 7:00-8:30, 10:30-13:30, 14:30-15:00, 18:30, 19:00, 20:00,  
21:00-23:30 
     10/17 0:00-11:30, 12:30, 13:00, 15:00, 16:00-17:00, 19:00-20:00, 22:00-
23:00 
     10/18 0:00, 1:30, 2:30, 4:30, 6:00-8:00 
     10/20 12:30-13:30, 15:00, 15:30 19:00-20:30, 21:30-23:30 
     10/21 0:00-1:00, 3:30, 6:30-11:30, 14:00-15:00, 17:30-18:30, 20:30, 22:00-
23:30 
     10/22 0:30, 1:00, 2:00-17:30, 18:30-22:30, 23:30 
     10/23 0:30-11:30 
     10/24 20:00 
     10/25 3:00, 3:30, 4:30-6:30, 8:30-12:00, 13:00-18:30, 19:30, 20:00, 21:00, 
23:30 
     10/26 0:00-23:30 
     10/27 0:00, 5:00, 6:00, 6:30 
     10/28 5:00, 6:00, 7:00-11:00, 12:00-16:00 
  
11. Missing data 
     Data loggers were not operated until September 20. 
 
The following data are missing during the period September 1 through December 
31, 1999: 
 
September 1999: 
     MP: No data were collected until September 20. 
October 1999: 
     MP: No data were collected between 10/28 16:30 and 10/29 10:00 due to a 
loss of battery power. 

November 1999: 
     MP: No data were collected between 11/19 14:00 and 11/30 23:30.  There was 
an apparent power malfunction.  It is suspected that the logger took some kind 
of sharp blow during the deployment, causing the circuitry to malfunction. 
December 1999: 
     MP: No data was collected between 12/01 00:00 and 12/03 14:00.  Please note 
comments 
for November. Loss of data in November continued until 12/03 14:00. 
	No data collected from 12/20 11:00 through 12/31 23:30. Period for 
collection ended at this time.

         
            
12. Other remarks/notes 
     As suggested by the previous research coordinator, the baseline site was 
moved to 41o  34.131' N 070o  31.294' W.  Data were collected at this site from 
September 20, 15:00, through December 20, 10:30. 

